Live from New York City for our audience
worldwide, Bloomberg's The Fed Decides
starts right now.
This is a special edition of Bloomberg
Surveillance with Jonathan Ferro, Lisa
Abramowicz, and Tom Keene. Bloomberg
Surveillance, The Fed [music] Decides.
Live on Bloomberg TV and radio, counting
down to another Fed rate decision, 27
minutes away. Hearts and minds [music]
in the Middle East, the pressure
building on Chairman Powell. That
decision just around the corner.
>> Yeah, a real question here, how this
Federal Reserve positions themselves
after not having a chance to really
address the oil shock taking place in
the Middle East, higher [music] prices,
and the fact you already have inflation
running hotter than they would like to
see in core PCE as well as the PPI that
we got earlier this week.
>> Kaplan calling calling this a medium war
in Foreign Affairs magazine. Has the
Federal Reserve system ever dealt with a
medium war? I don't think so. What's
changed for this committee the last time
they met that morning? Crude was 62.
[music]
Crude this afternoon is $30 higher.
Plus, that's a big change for this
committee to think about.
>> Do they say we are going to look through
this? [music] Is there Are they going to
say that typically oil price shocks are
transitory if you have to use that word,
and that they will look through it and
focus instead on weakness in the jobs
market? Or are they going to say we are
very concerned about inflation, we have
remained above [music] our target for
too long, and we need to take action?
>> John, a headline here off of Bloomberg,
Patrick Sykes in Istanbul, Dan Williams
in Tel Aviv. US aims to curb soaring oil
prices. Is Is this more than we've ever
seen the central banker to the world?
>> What options do they have? We've seen
escalation in the Middle East throughout
today already. What looks like we have a
new front for this war, [music] and it's
energy assets, and Iran is vowing to
retaliate. That's where the pressure's
coming from this afternoon for this
committee, attempting attempting [music]
to provide forecasts at 2:00 p.m.
Eastern time. Good luck to them. Really,
just get a dart board, get some darts,
and start throwing, because that's
essentially as good as they can
potentially [music] get. In the
meantime, we are seeing an escalation
here with a focus not just on storage
bins filling up, but actually some of
the production facilities are are
actually taking being taken offline.
Again, is this inflationary [music] or
is this deflationary down the line?
Ultimately, economists can debate that.
The Fed doesn't have that luxury based
on the numbers they have right now.
>> get the scores [music] going into this
one. We'll start with stocks. We'll go
to commodities. We'll finish on bonds.
The equity market this afternoon shaping
up as follows, declining across the
board on the S&P 500 down by 7/10
[music] of 1% on the Nasdaq just off
session lows down by 0.7 also. In the
commodity market, very close to 110 a
little bit earlier on in the session.
108.40 right now, higher by close to 5%
and that sets the tone for this, the
bond market. What a round trip this
fixed income market has been on. [music]
10s were down 30 basis points in
February, then all of a sudden a round
trip for the first few [music] weeks of
March.
>> Yeah, and whether we opine on where it's
going to go matters less than who we
have coming up shortly. JP Morgan's Bob
Michele, Kathy Jones of Charles Schwab,
and SocGen Subadra Rajappa. They will be
taking us [music] up to that Fed rate
decision at 2:00 p.m. Eastern. Then, we
get immediate reaction from former Fed
Vice Chair Rich Clarida, Stephanie Roth
of Wolfe Research, and Diane
[clears throat] Swonk of KPMG. And
finally, breaking down Chair Powell's
news conference, which he hopes to make
as boring as possible, but I guarantee
it will not be, Apollo's Torsten Slok
and BlackRock's Jeff Rosenberg.
>> Does he do an 8-minute press conference?
Is he going to take Look, when we were
chatting at all. [laughter] I said
earlier on this morning, TK, I was like,
"Look, it's operation epic fury in the
Middle East. It's operation make it
boring at 2:30 Eastern time."
>> If he doesn't say something in response
to whether he's going to stay on, if he
doesn't say something about whether this
is inflationary or disinflationary,
ultimately, it will be news. You can't
make the non-boring boring.
>> Condron in Washington says this is a big
deal. Is that really a focus here? I
think it's got to be a focus. You have
to ask the question directly to the
chairman, where are you going to be
after May? Is this your penultimate
meeting? Is the next meeting your last
one? If you can't tell that, what
exactly are you doing with forward
guidance? How do you give forward
guidance if you don't know the people in
the seat, especially if there are
dissents and the different people have
very different views? But Michael at JP
Morgan Asset Management charged with
answering some questions. He joins us
now. Bob, good afternoon. Good to see
you.
>> Happy to be here. Let's get to it.
Three-part act, statement, projections,
news conference. What are you expecting?
Well, first I think this is the most
mesmerizing FOMC meeting since COVID,
and I mean that. The three things we're
going to look at as you laid them out,
we're going to look at the post-meeting
statement. We're going to see how the
Federal Reserve characterizes the impact
to risk on both sides of its mandate,
full employment and price stability.
They should say they're elevated.
Secondly, you've got to go to the
summary of economic projections and see
how they reflect them in there. They
can't just say, "Oh my goodness, we
don't know, we can't do anything." They
can't keep their head in the sand. Even
if it's only decorative, they should
raise PCE by a couple tenths, they
should raise core by a tenth, and then
also [clears throat] they should
probably tilt unemployment higher by a
tenth to reflect the elevated risk to
both sides of their mandate. I think
when you look at potential rate cuts,
they should leave one rate cut in for
this year and one rate cut for next
year. The third part of this is the
dissents. To us, that's the most
critical thing. For sure, you can write
in pen that Myron will dissent for a 25
basis point rate cut. But will Waller
and/or Bowman follow him? If they do,
that tips the Fed's hand onto what they
should be what more worried about, the
impact to price stability or the impact
to the labor market? What's the
likelihood that with this two-sided
risk, they introduce or reintroduce the
idea of rate hikes over the next 12
months.
I think pretty much zero. I I don't see
that probability, and I know there's a
tremendous amount of conversation on the
ECB, for example, that their a single
mandate policy
price stability, so they should be
hiking rates. [clears throat] But let's
not forget even there, Christine Lagarde
is the chair of the ECB. She was the
finance minister of France back in 2008,
and after the ECB hiked rates in 2008,
she came out very publicly to criticize
it, as did President Sarkozy. So I think
central banks have learned from 2008,
and also the ECB from 2011, that when
you have this sort of G geopolitical
orthogonal shock to the system,
it's going to tighten financial
conditions somewhere. You don't pile on
by hiking rates, unless you see it
passing through to core prices, and then
ultimately to wages. We're a long way
away from that. I don't think they'll
open that can of worms.
>> Let's avoid right now the five-year,
seven-year, 10-year certitude of private
credit. Let's go the other way to the
short-term market. What does JP Morgan
see in the plumbing of our financial
system into this meeting?
Well, the
there's the bank lenders and the
non-bank lenders, and the bank lenders
are heavily regulated, the public
markets are heavily regulated, the
non-bank lenders not so much. I think
that's where you've seen some of the
volatility in the private credit
markets, and of course, there is that
concern when you see that kind of
volatility, and when you see a lot of
holders try to head for the exit, but
the system seems to be working. There
are 5% redemption clauses, Those are
being exercised. That's fine. I think
the big concern to everyone in the
markets is private credit hasn't been
through a shakeout yet. It's been
chugging along for the last 15 18 years.
It's a post GFC. Recessions create the
ultimate shakeout.
>> John, do we agree that if we didn't have
a war, private credit would be the
number one topic of issue?
>> Lisa's been talking about the same
thing. I'd say that. I'd say AI
disruption. And those two issues are
still percolating.
>> It's the accumulation of risk I think
over the last two months, Bob, that gets
everybody's attention. Is that a
headwind to this market? Do you know
what's so funny? Is I pulled up
financial
um indicators, financial condition
indicators. You pull up Bloomberg's,
it's gone nowhere. You look at market
pricing, it's gone nowhere. I think
that's a question for J. Powell. How do
they interpret uh
financial conditions indicators? Is
there a sense of complacency across the
market? Yeah, there are all these
concerns out there, but perhaps there's
so much liquidity in the system, it just
overwhelms the concerns for now.
>> We've certainly repriced energy. You've
seen that in the price of crude across
the futures curve. We've repriced
interest rates. You've seen that at the
Federal Reserve and the ECB looking out
12 months. What's curious to me is the
extent to which we haven't repriced
economic growth for this economy and for
elsewhere. Stagflation's a terrible
recipe. It's a terrible recipe for
growth. And if you have an increase in
oil prices that go beyond this current
level that you see, you start to wonder
when credit's going to pick up on that
beyond just the disruption. If you add
to that some sort of shock that will
potentially suppress growth.
>> We're super lucky the capital markets
are still wide open.
>> Correct. We've talked about this a
million times. Markets can shape the
events they anticipate. The fact that
we've still got credit spreads that are
still pretty tight. The fact that this
month alone, we had the biggest single
day of US IG supply, and it was wet with
tremendous demand, is good news. Whether
you think it's complacent or not, it
could be a whole lot worse if those
things weren't happening. And it raises
the specter of how fragile they are. And
that's really I think what people are
gauging. Is there something that Fed
Chair J. Powell could say that could
potentially disrupt that complacency or
that openness that we're seeing in
capital markets?
>> want to announce a MAG 7 bond offering
on the show today? Do you want to pitch
someone 100-year [laughter] Alphabet?
Can we pitch someone 100-year Alphabet?
>> what? We work with these companies when
they issue. The reality is they see a
lot of demand out there and they've got
to build the
the capacity to get that demand
monetized. So, it's real for now.
>> Is this a sales call? I think so. It's
good to see you, Bob. You're going to be
sticking it to some places. [laughter]
Say Bob Michael of J.P. Morgan up next
on a program with Kathy with Kathy Jones
at Charles Schwab, Subadra [music]
Rajappa of SocGen. That conversation
just around the corner heading into
this, a Fed decision just moments away.
>> [music]
>> We're in the fog of war. I think the
[music] Fed's in the fog of war as well.
The pressure's there, right? It could
complicate from an inflation picture. We
have [music] the greater risk of a
stagflationary scenario and that is
problematic for the Fed.
>> There's much more concern about the
stagflation risk.
>> That now [music] puts them in a very
very difficult position.
>> Not just inflation shock.
>> But this is creating a bit of a growth
shock.
>> The Fed is going to be cautious.
>> the Federal Reserve should just stay on
hold here on hold here. It is on hold.
>> On hold.
>> Wait and see. We hear wait, careful. We
hear a lot of words like that.
>> It's it's a wait and see game. [music]
>> I don't think that the Fed will be as
dovish as they have been.
>> So, I wish they just, you know,
not be hawkish or dovish, but be honest.
When oil prices go up, headline
inflation goes up.
>> The big piece of this is how long this
energy shock lasts. The will have to
increasingly acknowledge the two-sided
risk from this. This divided Fed is
going to look even more divided.
>> Certainly, the politics are swirling
around this.
>> The Fed motto for the March meeting
should be one battle after another. Live
from New York City this afternoon. Good
afternoon. [music] Good afternoon. That
Fed decision 15 minutes away. The scores
into it look like this. Equities
declining by 0.7% on the S&P 500 down by
0.6 on the Nasdaq. Setting the tone for
financial markets worldwide. These moves
[music] in the commodity market. Brent
and a major rally over the past few
weeks just short of 110 on Brent and up
by close to 4% [music] on the session.
And a big move at the front and long end
of the curve over the past few weeks.
Twos [music] around 370. 10s still
through 420.
>> Right now, Fed funds futures have
[music] priced out a full rate cut to
the remainder of 2026 as they see some
of the increases in inflation. Does the
Fed now lean into that and then confirm
that and say, "Look, [music] we don't
plan on making a move."
>> Let's get to Kathy Jones to Charles
Schwab. Kathy, welcome to the program.
We've had the energy shock. Now, the
Federal Reserve needs to provide some
forecast. What does this mean for
inflation, for growth, and ultimately,
what does it mean for policy? What are
you expecting?
Well, I I think there'll be a lot of
confusion. I'm not really taking the set
up or the dots um very seriously this
time around cuz they have to be like
throwing darts right now.
Um you know, given that we don't know
how long this lasts, it's already lasted
longer than the consensus. And
therefore, I when they're making these
forecasts, I I think it's just really a
guess on the part of the various
members. If you remember during COVID,
they actually suspended the dots because
of the uncertainty. I don't think
they'll do it this time around, but I
think it'll be really, really difficult
for anybody to pin down an you know, a
really precise estimate. But, I'm going
to be interested anyway to see the
dispersion of the dots, to see where
what they do with their estimates. I I'm
assuming the estimate for inflation goes
up and estimate for unemployment goes up
to reflect reality on the ground.
But in terms of what the Fed really
probably is concerned about right now is
inflation expectations. So when I'm
looking at those break evens in the tips
market, they're just continuing to move
up and move up, but they've really
focused on inflation expectations many
times in the past. So I think that may
be a real concern for them as they look
towards setting policy down the road. Do
you agree with Bob Michele who just said
that this is probably the most
interesting Fed meeting since the
pandemic era where they had to decide
what to do and when they did suspend
those dots?
Yeah, I I agree with Bob. It's it's just
very difficult situation for really for
any investor and certainly for the Fed.
How do you make a forecast when every 12
hours something new happens, right? But
I will say having maybe experienced
uh oil shocks in my past, um I think the
one thing that probably the Fed that
will resonate with the Powell and other
members of the Fed is they don't want to
make the mistakes that were made in the
past. Even if it's a bit different today
Right. and there's differences in
supply. The 1970s were you know a
disaster because the Fed was too late to
address the inflation coming from the
oil price shock. So I think that that's
a mistake they really want to avoid.
>> Bob, with this uncertainty, I mean
you're the only one to know or read the
11 and a half pages of Febosi. Are the
dynamics of the full faith and credit
bond market working right now? Describe
what your pros see, the nuances of the
bond market given this new uncertainty.
I I think they are and I know we can sit
here and say over this period of time
rates have risen 30 basis points, but I
look at them and I come come on. 370 on
the two-year the Fed funds rate is three
and five-eighths. That's flat to the Fed
funds rates. That's where it's supposed
to be. A little steepness out to the
10-year. This is all within sort of the
range that it's been in. What we're
hearing from clients is they're looking
for an opportunity to get into the bond
market. They feel under allocated to it.
They sense there's a little bit of a
backup here. Is this the time to get in?
And where do they get in? I also want to
remind people that the Fed went into
this Iran war concerned about the labor
market. It was no hire, no fire for good
reason. Who businesses didn't know what
the the shape of tariffs would look
like, and everyone was concerned about
AI. You didn't want to hire somebody
today you might have to fire 18 months
from now. Now you pile on top of that
businesses and households are facing
attacks from higher energy prices. So
businesses for sure don't feel like
doing any hiring now. I think they're
going into this meeting even more
concerned about the labor market than
the pass-through of this orthogonal oil
shock.
>> How many times have we heard that this
week? That all roads lead to buying
bonds. That if this shock continues in
the Middle East, buy bonds. It's going
to hit growth. If it goes away, buy
bonds. Yields are backed up too much.
Just buy bonds seems to be the
conclusion. Well, I know one bank CEO
who would take the other side of that.
>> Oh, it sounds [laughter] like
And I heard that yesterday. I will say
the counter argument to that is if the
Fed actually is overly dovish, do you
start to see a huge sell-off and a and a
an increasing a possibility of there
being a 1970s style shock where wage
growth follows some of the increases
that we're seeing in commodity prices.
>> So Kathy, let's come to you on that. The
assessment of second-order effects, the
potential for pass-through to core good
prices, pass-through to other prices in
the economy.
Yeah, I think it's a a real risk to the
economy that we're going to see some
pass-through. You know, consumer demand
has been
resilient Uh, despite all the problems
that we're having, say, in the labor
market and elsewhere. And if that
continues, then the ability to pass
through the price increases will be
there.
Um, I do think that that is, you know,
again, a risk that the Fed has to deal
with, even if the labor market, uh,
weakens from here, how much weight do
they put on that if we're seeing core
goods prices continue to go up, and they
have They have been above the Fed's
target for now what, 4 years, and not
making any progress towards their
target. So, it's really a difficult
position for them to be in. Yes, if the
unemployment rate really starts to ramp
up, then that means demand destruction.
That means the Fed will ease. But until
I think that dynamic starts to happen,
um, the focus is going to be on trying
to contain the inflation pressure
passing through from oil prices. Kathy,
just a final question for you. The Fed
chair his last scheduled meeting should
be April 29th. Do you think he's going
to be there June 17th?
I It's looking more likely all the time.
Uh, can't handicap it real well, but
it's looking more likely all the time. I
can tell you, a break exclusive, is that
what you call it, TK? Break exclusive.
Break exclusive. Yes. Kathy won't be
there.
Kathy won't be there cuz Kathy is
retiring. Kathy, can I just say on
behalf of this all, thank you so much
for your contribution to this program
over the years and how lucky we've been
to catch up with you every single Fed
meeting. Kathy, before you go, a word of
wisdom on fixed income. What's the
biggest lesson in your career What can
you pass on to a new generation?
Oh, you know, I I think I think fixed
income is wildly underappreciated and
and not well understood by most
investors. I would say, you know, do
your homework. It's It's a great place
to invest. Is that shade on Liz Ann
Sonders? Of course not.
Absolutely not. Every fixed income pro,
even when they're exiting, throws some
shade at equity strategists. They
[laughter] do.
Every single time.
So, there we are, you know. Swan song.
Kathy's a class act.
>> [laughter]
>> Wishing you the best in retirement,
Kathy.
>> Absolutely. Hear, hear. Thank you. And
and thank you to all of you at Bloomberg
for having me on so many times. It's
really been a great honor. You always
make everybody feel comfortable and and
able to speak freely. So, I really have
appreciated it.
>> Kathy, we're the lucky ones. Thank you
so much. Best of luck. Kathy Jones there
of Charles Schwab, Bob from Macquarie
Equity. Guys all the time, right? Just
the fixed income religion. Well, you
know, I'm backing off of them now. I
know they're down there at the
They're down there at the bottom of the
capital structure and absorbing all of
this volatility. You have to have some
sympathy for the junior securities guys.
>> go. Nothing changes, right? Nothing
changes. Sebastien Galy of Societe
Generale joins us now. Sebastien,
welcome to the show. Decision about 6
minutes away. What are you expecting to
see at 2:00 p.m. Eastern time?
You know, I I mean, congratulations to
Kathy. I think it's fantastic and I
completely agree with her sentiment that
uh people don't pay as much attention to
the bond market as they should because
you get a lot of very, very useful
signals in the bond market, including
what you're seeing right now heading
into the Fed meeting. I mean, the front
end is starting to push higher. The
market's pushing back on the possibility
that the Fed will be able to cut this
year. Um you know, in fact, they're
pricing in for no cuts for this year.
And I also agree with Bob. I think that
the market is uh you know, with the
10-year yields and 2-year yields for the
most part within that
we've had for the last 6 months, bonds
are still the place where you want to
put your money to work because of the
fact that even if the Fed doesn't hike
rates, you know, the front end of the of
the yield curve is going to be pegged
somewhat. I think investors are going to
flock to uh you know, the belly of the
curve given the fact that as the Fed
stays on hold for longer, your your risk
is that they might have to cut more in
the future and that might impact growth.
So, to us, it feels like the belly is
going to continue to to outperform.
As for the Fed meeting, I think I'm I'm
expecting, you know, this to be more of
a placeholder meeting. I probably expect
more of a
bearish bias, which is a hawkish bias
bias I should say for the for the Fed.
And the changes to the summary of
economic projections are going to be
quite interesting. I'm expecting them to
to push up their expectations for
headline and core inflation and perhaps
bring down their expectations for growth
for this year. Subadra, have we seen the
peak in the yield curve so far? We've
seen now the two's ten spread now at
this tightest going back to November of
last year as people price in the Fed
remaining on hold for longer and lower
long-term growth projections. Is that
trend going to continue?
I I think that the two's ten score does
look very flat. I don't really see the
prospects for the Fed switching from an
easing bias to a tightening or a hiking
bias just just like what we're seeing
perhaps
with the ECB and other global central
banks. I think that the Fed stays on
hold for longer at best and that should
keep the the two-year yield somewhat,
you know, within
you know, within the current range or
slightly higher perhaps.
Unless we shift towards a hike around
CTU yields really starting to rise. But
that said, I think that like I was
saying earlier, I think that the growth
prospects and the potential for a a
meaningful slowdown in growth next year
would mean that the yield curve is going
to have to remain somewhat flat. So, the
investors are going to continue to buy
the belly. Subadra, communication is key
and in this news conference the chairman
is bound to be asked about its future.
If he commits to staying on because
Kevin Warsh won't have time to be
confirmed. In your mind, I'm interested
in your individual perspective on this.
Your judgment as a market participant.
Does staying on provide consistency or
invite controversy?
I think he definitely provides
consistency. What the market's looking
for is a steady hand from the Fed and
the committee at large. I mean, what
what we don't want to see is kind of a
temporary Fed coming in and and not
knowing what the direction of policy is
going to be. So, to me, I think the best
way to transition would be from Powell
to the next Fed chair
in an orderly fashion as opposed to
having somebody interim and then having
to switch back to to Powell. So, that's
kind of what I'm I'm hoping for.
Sebatra, good to see you. Thank you.
of
Silk Chen. Bob Pisani, same to you. Same
question. Do you agree with that?
Um I I think him staying on creates
stability. Personally, I believe he'll
stay on past the midterm elections. Past
the midterms?
>> Past the midterms.
>> Why will he stay on?
Because he'll want to ensure that the
market sees the independence of the Fed,
that he's already been there for 14
years, he's a stabilizing force, and
they can't be politically influenced.
>> Will he stay on as Fed chair or as
governor or both? Um I I think I think
after the midterms, he will no longer be
Fed chair, but I think um at the May
meeting and perhaps the July meeting, he
will be uh still the Fed chair. It all
comes down to what Tom Tillis decides,
what's what the courts decide
uh on uh Lisa Lisa Cook and and, you
know, the suit against uh Jay Powell.
All of that um resides with Tom Tillis.
>> be simple. Right. [laughter] It's got
complicated, hasn't it? It's just
unreal. The Fed's got complicated. Neil
Dutta of RenMac writing in, "Watch, no
matter what, we'll walk into the Eccles
Building as the weakest Fed chair in
recent memory. He's limping in." The
opinion of Neil Dutta just moments ago.
In part because of skepticism by the
market, but also in part because this is
just a difficult economic time. There
isn't a consensus to be had on exactly
how you grapple with stagflation.
>> This is not a small matter on real and
also nominal GDP. With all the
distractions we've got now, and I want
to talk to Clarida about that when he
shows up, but to me this the weaker
economies are really interesting trend.
>> With 61 seconds away from a decision,
and a lot of people in this market will
be looking for dissent. A dissent from
some governors in particular who are
worried in particular who are worried
about the labor market.
And on the same committee, the very same
committee at the very same meeting,
there's a collection of officials on
this committee who are worried about
overshooting the inflation target for
the past 5 years. That's how divided
that committee is right now. How do you
deal with a paradigm shift with an oil
shock thrown in where you have AI
recreating real questions about
productivity at the same time that you
do have inflation, but you also have the
potential for more efficiency?
>> Crude has gone from in the 60s when the
Fed last met the morning of the last Fed
meeting at the end of January to in the
90s off the back of a shock in the
Middle East and a major rally over the
past 2 weeks plus. The scores heading
into this decision look like this.
Equity markets this afternoon on the S&P
declining by 6/10 of 1% in the bond
market. We're looking at twos, 10s, and
30s shaping up as follows. Yields on a
2-year at 3.71. With that Fed decision,
here's Mike McKee.
No change in rates, no change in dots,
one dissent, but some big changes in
inflation expectations. Fed officials
see one cut still in 2026 at some point
even though their statement notes that
uncertainty about the economic outlook
remains elevated. Three members who
favored no cuts in this year moved their
dots down to one. The statement goes on
to say the implication of developments
in the Middle East for the US economy
are uncertain and the committee remains
attentive to risks to both sides of
their mandate. They still see one more
cut in 2027. Stephen Myron, the only
dissenter, he wanted a quarter point cut
this time and from the dots we discern
that he still wants 100 basis points at
some point this year. The language about
future moves remains the same. They
still talk about the extent and timing
of additional adjustments to the target
range. It's the summary of economic
projections in which we see a lot of
changes. PCE inflation this year is
forecast at 2.7%
up from 2.4% in December. Core is also
seen at 2.7% up from 2.5. Both drop to
2.2% next year up from 2.4% in the
December SEP. Core is seen at 2.7%
uh this year. Uh both drop back as I
mentioned next year uh to 2% in 2028.
GDP marked up a tenth in both years both
of the next 2 years to 2.4% this year
and 2.3% next year. The unemployment
forecast remains 4.4% in 2026 dropping
to 4.3%
next year. That's up from 4.2% in
December. And the longer run estimate
for Fed funds seen as the proxy for the
neutral rate rises a tick to 3.1%
guys. Mike McKee, thank you so we'll
catch up with you a little bit later.
Let's start with the price action. We've
got equities then bonds. We'll have a
sneak peek at what's happening in the
commodity market because we're tracking
that throughout the day here at
Bloomberg. Equity markets looking at the
S&P 500 off session lows but still
negative by 0.5% in the bond market
yield slightly higher on a two year by
two basis points. Basically as you were
at 370 on twos, on tens at about 421
which is basically where we were going
into this decision. So this is what
we're doing. You go into the
projections. We'll ignore the statement
just for a while. We'll go into the
statement and we'll look at the
projections and compare what they were
projecting back in December and have a
look at what they're projecting now. So
let's just go through 2026 for GDP
revised slightly higher. That's some
good news. 27 as well, same thing by the
way. So, they revised GDP higher, they
revised inflation higher, and they've
kept the projection, the implied
projection for interest rates exactly
where it was for December. Those kind of
moves should be music to the ears of
bullish market participants.
>> This is an incredibly dovish hold just
by virtue of the fact that only one
person dissented and it was Governor
Miron. That alone, but these projections
highlighting a tolerance for higher
inflation and still the belief that it
will come down by 2027 to that 2% level
without hiking rates and continuing with
rate cuts gives you a sense of where
this Fed's mind is at. This seems like
more of a consensus than I expected,
than a lot of people expected, and it is
more to looking through any kind of oil
price shock.
>> In honor of Alan Greenspan's 100th
birthday, it was a Greenspan decision.
Everybody got on board with the
chairman. It's all there is to it. And
the out yes, the good news on the
inflation front, you decide whether this
is good. The Fed is still basically
forecasting the same inflation glide
path as they were before even with this
lift to 2026. How do you say transitory
without saying transitory?
>> in there in the forecast.
>> the reason why you're seeing the yield
curve steepen and on the margins you're
seeing 10-year yields higher on this
because ultimately this is a Fed that is
willing to stay on hold and look through
an oil price shock, look through the
fact that even core PCE has been higher
than expected and is expected to stay
that way because ultimately they do
think the labor market is showing signs
of cracks even though they don't
necessarily see unemployment rate
ticking up and they do want to err on
the side of being more accommodative.
>> I'd like to speak to just briefly, get
him on the phone. Governor Waller. I was
about to say, Chris.
>> Okay. No dissent. He said it was a coin
flip who would come down to the labor
market report and that labor market
report was overwhelmingly soft. So, what
does he see in the outlook for inflation
that's kept him on the sidelines?
>> Governor Waller, please join us. If you
want to call in, we'll take you. I mean,
ultimately that is one of the key
players because he is a pillar of the
swing vote, if you will, and a lot of
people are looking to him for some sort
of guidance about what exactly is
driving his decision.
>> But at Washington State, he was expert
on game theory, and when there's a war,
there's a different game theory.
>> This is a major shock we're working
through. Bob Michael at JP Morgan Asset
Management still with us around the
table. Bob, do you have any thoughts off
the back of this one? I do. Um they're
telling us, "Don't worry about it.
There's a little bit of a near-term
inflation shock. They added a tenth more
than we did, but it's fine. The economy
is going to use that to accelerate." Um
so they increased GDP. That I don't get.
Um and they left unemployment where it
is, and it also doesn't sync with the
dots. I I heard uh Mike McKee say that
three members who previously voted for
no cut um changed their view. Um so and
and went to a cut.
>> The median dot 3.4, December projection
the median dot 3.4. Joining us now to
discuss is the former Fed Vice Chair
Richard Clarida. Now, Rich, I know the
word transitory is banned and they can't
use it anymore, particularly in the news
conference, but does this scream
transitory?
Well, it certainly screams uh we need a
we need a synonym uh for it that uh
temporary, not long-lived. You know,
they could justify it perhaps by looking
at the oil futures which still show this
is dissipating over time. But the the
short answer is nobody, including the
Fed, knows. This is very elevated
geopolitical risk, and and there are
risks on both sides. But the baseline, I
agree with your your panel, is is dovish
uh constructive.
Uh
Rich, I'm just wondering how much this
is just AI written all over it. How much
this is a Fed that is basing their
entire assumption on a productivity boom
tied to artificial intelligence and the
deployment of it through the economy and
frankly uh disinflation on its heels.
I think there's an element of that,
perhaps more so with the incoming uh
chair than some other uh members. Um I
think it's also a statement however that
AI is is a support to demand in the
economy that to some extent along with
those big beautiful bill tax cuts is
probably going to offset some of what
the drag would be from the oil price
increases. But but again this is a model
or a baseline and I think certainly
internally will will hear that there was
a discussion of the risk cases as well.
Professor Clarida when you were at
Columbia herding cats Xavier
Sala-i-Martin taught the acclaimed
principles of economics. Talk to us
about the risk of a demand destruction
here. To me it's extraordinary whether
it's war short-term or a more permanent
demand destruction. Should that be a
legitimate concern of the Fed?
Well the demand destruction comes simply
from the fact that not only oil prices
but energy prices and goods that are
intensive in oil and energy will go up
and that will tend to reduce the real
incomes
for millions and tens of millions
of households. Now on the other side of
that you have the AI boom but there is
no doubt that this is going to squeeze
real aggregate demand the longer the oil
shock persists. Check out the price
action. Let's go to equities. We're
still down by 0.6% unmoved by what on
the surface of things looks like a
dovish decision from the central bank.
Check out the bond market similar story
no big moves off the back of this. The
only takeaway this can change but the
only takeaway for me
is there is nothing this institution can
do
to drive this market in the face of the
shock elsewhere. Jeff Currie of Carlyle
said it really well earlier this morning
on Bloomberg TV. When Jeff turned around
and said there's nothing the central
bank can do about this you cannot print
barrels.
This market is still at the mercy of
what happens in the commodity market and
the Fed is not the circuit breaker
anymore because this Fed decision I
would sit here and argue is fairly
dovish. With the exception of the
absence of a descent coming from
Governor Waller, is fairly dovish. To
come out and say the outlook for growth
is better. We've revised higher the
outlook for inflation and the median dot
is exactly the same, screams dovish. And
yet here we are, no big moves in
financial markets. I think that's
notable. The Fed is playing dodgeball
without the ball. They're not the
pitcher in a game. And right now what
they're dealing with is shock after
shock without necessarily a historic
precedent. Yes, there are historic
precedents for oil shocks, but not for
the AI shock and what that does to the
overall economy. So, they might remain
on hold and that might be bullish, but
not in this moment because right now if
another oil or or natural gas plant gets
bombed, people are going to be watching
that much more than anything coming out
of J. Powell. You know, uh Vice Chairman
Clarida, the thing I would point out
here and Damian Sassower at Bloomberg is
very cautious on EM uh uh suddenly here.
In this meeting and in this press
conference, more than ever is this the
central banker to the world?
Well, sure it is. Um and um and I think
that the Fed Fed is aware of that. And I
think one thing this episode is is
reminding of folks, we've seen it in in
the in the dollar, obviously, uh is, you
know, you since since the uh Iran
hostilities commence, you know, the
price of gold is down, the price of the
dollar is up. So, I think there is that
element uh at as well. Uh but, you know,
broadly, the Fed is reacting to events.
I I I think Lisa said said it well.
First and foremost, this is a major
geopolitical and economic um a shock. Uh
the dodgeball analogy I think is a good
one. So, I I think yes, the Fed is the
central banker to the world, but but
it's not the main attraction right now.
But, Michael with this is J.P. Morgan.
And so, what is the what with the
tentacles of J.P. Morgan around the
world, how is EM doing? I see Philippine
peso almost at the 60. You saw Australia
raising uh rates in in other
>> Oh, wow. Wow. Wow. You're calling
Australia EM? No, I'm not calling
Australia EM. Get you in trouble, TK.
>> you know, it's
I'm I'm even watching Aussie EM though,
which is a life of its own.
>> Sydney watching. Uh well, yeah. What is
this what is it Very early morning.
Deeply, deeply unhappy with that.
>> But I read all the novels sure,
including Tom like Alice. I want to know
uh
as a central banker of the world, the
sensitivities he faces. What does JP
Morgan see in the reaction in the
currency markets, the reaction in fixed
income of EM as the chairman speaks?
Uh I think there are a couple things.
One, we felt going through this that the
dollar would be the safe haven bid. Um
and we're seeing a lot of that. We also
felt for those who wanted to diversify
away from dollar, emerging market FX was
the place to go. The central banks in
those regions seem to be on top of
things. And you you had a split between
those who are energy importers and those
are energy exporters, those that are
sitting on rare earth minerals and other
minerals and those who aren't. And I
think we're seeing all of that play out.
But I will tell you, our client base
still feels under allocated to emerging
markets both equity and fixed income.
We're seeing those allocations continue
to come in. Um I think there's a good
tailwind there. You just went long
Australia.
>> There you go. Back-to-back hikes at the
emerging markets central bank over the
RBA. See that? I [clears throat]
honestly [laughter] there's some
offended people down under right now.
I'm not weighing in on this one, but I
will say I will say that tomorrow will
be really interesting with the BOE and
ECB. There you go. You tell them, Bremo.
>> Rich Clarida still with us. Rich, I want
to come to you on an important topic to
wrap things up. A really serious one.
The future for Chairman Powell.
This is not how usually these things
play out. Typically, how this plays out,
the chairman knows when his term
finishes, he gets a great send-off, he
walks away, and he does a $1 million
speech in about 12 months time, and has
a happy retirement. This feels so
different, Rich. Kevin Warsh has
ultimately been nominated. We have no
idea when the confirmation hearing is
going to be. Bob Michael sat here a
little bit earlier and said he thinks
the chairman, Jay Powell, is still going
to be there by the time you get to the
midterms. Rich, how do you think this
process is going to play out in the next
several months?
Well, you're you're you're you're you're
absolutely correct. This is
unprecedented unusual that the handoff
is usually pretty smooth and and and
very well telegraphed. Um and the
difference, of course, now is several
fold. One, of course, is the you know,
the DOJ investigation of Powell that the
Fed is pushing back on. In addition, of
course, the even Warsh getting a hearing
is is now up up in the air.
Um you know, I I I certainly do expect
Jay Jay Powell will will will stay on
and perhaps a meeting or two after Warsh
finally arrives. You know, whether or
not that's after the midterms, I'm not
sure. I think Jay Powell will move on
once Warsh is in place uh to to his his
future
life. But his his real focus is on
maintaining the the independence of the
of the institution. And I think he will
be in place until Warsh is confirmed and
perhaps a meeting or two
thereafter. Rich, I appreciate your
insight on the topic. Thank you, sir.
Rich Clarida, the former Fed vice chair
on this Fed decision and the chairman's
future. If you're only just joining us
on the program, welcome to the show. So,
unchanged the policy rate at the Federal
Reserve about 15 minutes ago. Some
dissent, the vote 11 to 1. That dissent
came from an obvious place. Governor
Michelle Bowman voting for an interest
rate reduction. For the projections, big
focus on what was happening with
inflation. They've lifted their outlook
for inflation for this year at least,
but left the median dot ultimately
unchanged, implying one rate cut from
this Federal Reserve for 2026. To me,
the most interesting takeaway is what
you said, which is this market doesn't
seem to care, even though this is very
much a dovish hold. this actually is
news in Fed land and yet the market
doesn't pay attention because there's
another game in town and it's everything
else in the world and some people might
say, "Oh, no, the adults can't control
this. They can't step in and save us."
And the other people will say, "We
haven't had a free market in a long time
and this is what it looks like." And
guess what? It's a welcome welcome
exercise. And so those two sides of the
debate are playing out markets today.
>> market. Well, I mean that's the whole
thing. Ultimately it's
I'm [laughter] kind of excited about
this. I mean that's kind of a nice
thing, you know, not to have the thumb
on the scale all the time and same story
over and over again.
>> change. All right.
>> It's a change. Stephanie Roth of Wolfe
Research. I can see how excited you are.
You're not alone. I've been waiting for
that moment for a long, long time. Major
moves. 5% away from all-time highs.
>> Even the Japanese market. It's so now
exciting. Who knew? Oh, they're they're
actually trading the benchmark in Japan
[laughter] now. Trading There's actually
traders. Stephanie, I'm sorry. Stephanie
Roth of Wolfe Research joins us now for
more. Stephanie, we need your reaction
to the decision and where you expect the
emphasis to be in this news conference.
Yeah, I mean the emphasis is going to be
on the reaction function provided that
energy prices end up staying longer. The
question is, are they going to end up
looking through this or do they
ultimately end up having to be dovish as
a result because growth will end up
slowing? And our own view is that
because the economy is so different
today versus 2022, they'll ultimately
have to be more dovish as a result of
the the war in Iran rather than the
opposite. Otherwise, it tells you a
story of productivity and that growth is
actually going to be higher in the
future years, but then, you know,
nothing else changes. And the one thing
that we didn't talk about or that wasn't
talked about yet was was the longer run
dot shifting up a little bit. Well, this
to me, Stephanie, that I'm really
wondering about is how much does a more
dovish Fed enable something that looks
more like 1970s or more like 2022
and what we saw with inflation and the
read-through? Is that something of a
concern for you?
No, because the backdrop is so different
today versus say 2022. If you look at
2022, the unemployment rate was 3.7
heading to 3.5. Today it's 4.4.
Here I'll gains is growing at 600,000.
Today they're somewhere between 0 and
50,000 on average. The inflation
backdrop was different. The core
inflation was 5.5, today it's 3. So, the
idea that we're going to have a repeat
of 2022 seems like a very low likelihood
event and therefore that's not something
I would expect the Fed to react in that
way because the the data probably won't
support a reflationary type of
environment.
>> Stephanie, given a war, given what oil's
doing, John mentions it's 60 to
basically 60 to 100 or
even higher, we're still slaves to the
job market. And the answer is the
unemployment rate hasn't broken.
>> [clears throat]
>> With the war, with the distractions, how
exposed is this Fed into the summer?
Yeah, I mean, I think they're going to
be in an environment over the summer
where
base case is the unemployment rate is
probably steady, but they're going to be
looking at this most closely. That's
going to be the deciding factor between
whether they are able to cut, probably
not at Worsh's first meeting, maybe in
September or December. Right.
>> And it's going to all come down to the
unemployment rate. Is it notably above
4.5, in which case they have a window to
be able to ease? And if if not, then
it's going to be tougher Worsh to get
the rest of the members on board. Bob,
synthesize Michael Feroli's work on this
then. The fact is the labor market
hasn't cracked yet. They have to wait,
don't they?
Um I think that's part of it. I'm still
gobsmacked by the Fed's decision.
They're basically saying all of this
going on in the Middle East is a speed
bump. That yeah, inflation will tick up,
you know, 3/10
uh and 2/10 here and there, uh but the
economy will accelerate, unemployment uh
will stay stable, and it's off to the
races. I just don't see that. I think
there is a real impact uh to inflation
and ultimately to the economy and the
labor market.
>> This is the heart of the matter, John.
This is the absolute heart of the
matter, and everybody has to recalibrate
their x-axis to how long is this going
to go on, and then you get to demand
destruction.
>> this earlier, and I think it's important
to keep going over it. We've repriced a
lot in this market. We've repriced
energy, had a big move from the '60s out
to triple digits. We've repriced
interest rates. We've taken out a lot of
easing for the Federal Reserve, and
we've priced in hikes in places like the
ECB, two of them, I think for this year
now. Yet, we haven't repriced growth,
and the Fed hasn't either. And I'm not
just talking about where spot is trading
or the front month on the futures curve.
If you go out to December and look at
where December is traded right now,
we're close to 80. So, we've gone from
the '60s to close to '80s on the
December contract, and the Federal
Reserve has lifted the outlook for
growth. What's driving that? I I wonder
how much momentum they think is in the
economy, how much AI and data center
spending is going on. Um were they
surprised by the Delta earnings and
that, you know, sales are at a high
despite higher energy prices. I think
the reality is when you've had close to
a 50% hike in energy prices, it's a tax
on businesses and households, and they
will respond by cutting back some of
their consumption. We have the smartest
viewers, and I just want to point that
out. One of our viewers just wrote in.
We do. And pointed out that among the
members, the actual dots might say one
thing, but the risk to GDP downside
included 14 members versus eight prior
at the December meeting. The risk to the
upside was 16 members for core PCE as
well as the unemployment rate. That was
up from 12 and 13 members, respectively.
So, that stagflationary outcome still in
the back minds of so many of these Fed
members. They just aren't making this
their base case. So, I just I don't
understand, Bob, and I guess that this
is my question. Is the reaction
function, essentially, they will hold
pat even in this scenario, or do you
have a sense of what the reaction
function is to true stagflation? Well,
the bottom line is the market is just
looking through the Fed right here and
saying doesn't make sense, don't get it,
don't know what they were thinking. The
projections don't make sense to me, but
I know where we are. There's a lot of
tension still in the Middle East. It's
yet to completely play out. I think
where we are now is about fair. It can
go either way from here. So, it's
completely dismissive of the FOMC FOMC
statement.
>> Before you go, what's the number one
question for Chairman Powell into this
news conference?
Yeah, I mean the biggest question is
going to be provided energy prices are
elevated through the through much of the
summer, how are you going to think about
the the balance of risk? Is this going
to be
something that you're going to
you know, look through and do you expect
that growth is going to be lower as a
result? Or is it something that you're
worried about more similar to 2022? And
what are the balance of risks uh in your
mind in terms of how this could play
out?
>> Stephanie, good to see you. As always,
thanks for jumping on. Stephanie Roth
there of Wolfe Research. To build on the
conversation, Diane Swonk of KPMG.
Diane, I'm going to use a quote of yours
to ask you the question. A dual mandate
or a dueling mandate? What have we got?
A dueling mandate, and I think that's a
real problem. I think the Fed is this
dovish sort of numbers don't add up. I
think I agree with that completely. A
dovish pause is not what I would expect.
I would have expected some people to
actually put in rate hikes in this
meeting, and they didn't. And I think
there's a real issue about we saw rate
cuts in late 2024 to shore up the labor
market. We didn't get any jobs. We saw
rate cuts in late 2025 to shore up the
labor market. I don't think we're going
to get a lot of jobs from those. That
brings up the issue is is the problem in
the labor market more structural and
systemic? Something that rate cuts alone
cannot cure and spur the demand for
workers on? If that's the case, if you
cut rates further, you're risking a more
persistent bout of inflation or worse, a
stagflationary scenario. And I think the
devil in the detail is in that
stagflation scenario. Also important is
that they raised their non-inflationary
rate. That is reflecting, yes,
productivity growth and the idea that
the economy can grow more robustly
without having in
without having inflation, but that also
means higher non-inflationary rate,
which is an important marker to put down
before Kevin Warsh takes on as Fed chair
since he has argued that productivity
growth should lower that
non-inflationary rate. That is not what
the Fed is saying. And I think that's
very important, but I am very concerned
about we're 5 years in. We've got
consumers expecting more inflation than
they did in late 2024.
And there those expectations are going
to rise, especially with salient prices
like prices at the pump going up. And
there's already a long tail due to the
problems in the Middle East. Production
idled is not easily brought back online.
It's weeks to months. And we're rolling
supply chains the world over. You create
scarcities that go below the destruction
in demand. That gives you stagflation.
Diane, is this the Fed meeting where
forward guidance just died?
Absolutely. We didn't have a lot of
forward guidance to begin with, but
absolutely. And I think, you know, what
really will be interesting in the
chairman's comments is what was the
debate in terms of growth, what went
into these numbers, how did the debate
fall out? I think the devil in the
details here is that if there is a bit
of a stagflationary concern
[clears throat] out there, and there
should be.
Diane, there's you know, we we suffer
from three zip code scenario here in New
York City. You've got a much greater
national perspective. I take real issue
with a narrow part of America being
affected by $5 a gallon gas. How much of
America's going to be flat on their back
from some of these shocks?
Well, unfortunately or fortunately, we
do have fiscal stimulus right now and
that fiscal stimulus will help absorb
the shock instead of going into other
kinds of spending and that will help
households.
Uh tax refunds are showing up in
consumer bank accounts right now, but
the combination of fiscal stimulus with
Remember, inflation is accelerating
right now. We saw PCE accelerate. We saw
the PPI numbers today. The translation
of the PPI and the CPI for PCE for the
month of February hotter, especially on
core services. That's aside from what's
going on in terms of tariff-based
inflation. That is important right now
and I think that's getting lost in
translation, but it does show up in the
devil in the details of those dots and
how the forecast show up. You could have
had one very strong forecast push up the
GDP number within the group. There are
people who believe
within the administration that will get
5 to 6% growth this year. That was their
forecast going in. If Steve Mnuchin
wrote down a number like that, that
would have raised the overall growth
figure when in fact the rest of the
committee has seen a more stagflationary
scenario. I do think it's a dovish pause
that is a bit disappointing right now
given where we're at even though I'm
very worried about the labor market. I
just don't think the Fed can cure what
ails it. So, Diane, what do you think
the emphasis Where do you think the
emphasis will be in this news conference
with Chairman Powell in about 5 minutes
time?
I think the emphasis is going to be on
uncertainty and wait and see
and that would just sort of be where
they are right now and that they they
don't know where the next rate move is
actually going to be and I think that's
the right way to play it. Diane Swonk,
Diane always good to catch up with you.
Thanks for being with us. Diane Swonk
that breaking down the Fed decision. If
you are just joining us, welcome to the
program. The news conference about 4
minutes away with the chairman of the
Federal Reserve down in Washington, D.C.
In any other time at any other moment
we'd be talking talking about the
penultimate meeting of the Federal
Reserve chair, but we have not spoken to
a single person today who thinks this is
the penultimate meeting of the Federal
Reserve chair and most believe Chairman
Powell, including the former Fed vice
chair, is going to be sticking around
for at least a few more months.
>> Partly because we don't know when the
confirmation of the next Fed chair is
going to be and that ultimately lies
with the man from North Carolina, Tom
Tillis. Ultimately though there is this
question about credibility for the Fed
continuity. I just wonder if he gets up
there and he says what we do doesn't
matter right now as long as we don't
hike and as long as we don't cut that
much, we're not in the driver's seat. I
mean ultimately this is their path to
say this is an economy that's moved on
from us. We are not in control. We are
watching it just like you. Unspoken
John, will be the idea of the recent
election results including yesterday in
Illinois and I also point out a set of
allies saying no to the president on
this war and then Mr. Powell
representing the institution, it will
stay around more so than the last
meeting.
>> A big piece of this bull case for this
economy and for this market
>> [clears throat]
>> has been tax refunds.
We hear that phrase get bandied around
all the time on this program. Tax
refunds, tax refunds. How big are these
tax refunds actually going to be? And
how are attitudes towards the economy
changing given the shock of the past few
weeks? Where will that money actually
go?
Well, we're seeing it now when we look
at Chase deposit accounts. We're seeing
particularly the bottom couple quintiles
of earners see their deposit balances
start to go up a bit, but the
uncomfortable truth is they're now
paying that out again at the pump. And
we can't forget that businesses and
households were already paying a higher
tax because of tariffs on prices, and
now energy prices are going to create
yet another tax on their disposable
income. Bram, the squeeze is real. The
energy bills are severe, and they were
high already, and now they're getting
higher. You know, Delta and American
were perfect examples of how the economy
is doing pretty well and people are
still spending. The difference is that
the costs are getting that much higher,
and so the room that people have and
that companies have to do okay is
getting narrower and narrower, and the
Fed's watching this, and they don't have
the silver bullet to really make this a
better situation.
>> scientific surveillance research today
in the WR at Charles de Gaulle.
Was popping the two of us. You could
easily do it for $7,000, and you're
enjoying it. This morning, just under
$11,000.
>> pretending you don't fly business class?
>> That's Oh, you know, that's That's Is
that what you're doing? That's not
premier. We're not doing the first class
thing, but business class I'm going to
suggest is up at least 20% instantly.
Instantly.
>> Is that Polaris? Is that United business
class? Is that the front of the plane?
>> I actually don't even know. Yes, that's
Yes, actually I do. I remember going to
something a demonstration about it, not
actually
>> [laughter]
>> Not exactly experiencing it. For
everybody to know we live in different
worlds. [laughter] For everybody to know
out in the world, John and I are in
steerage, and you're on the Gulfstream
4. That is such a load of Nice one, too.
>> [laughter]
>> Hey Bob, before you go, just a final
word. About a minute away from this news
conference, what are you looking for?
Um I'm looking for a couple things. I
want to understand how they're thinking
about the war and the elevated risk to
both sides of their mandate.
Um and then, secondly, I want to know
how they got to their forecast numbers.
Um I think Diane's right. They There
needs to be some explanation there. And
the explanation could be quite simple.
Could be, well, one member put in a 6%
growth rate. Okay, well, let us know
that. Well, let's get into it in just a
moment. The chairman of the Federal
Reserve entering the room after leaving
interest rates unchanged. Let's take a
listen to the chairman of the Federal
Reserve.
>> [clears throat]
>> Good afternoon.
My colleagues and I remain squarely
focused on achieving our dual mandate
goals of maximum employment and stable
prices for the benefit of the American
people.
The US economy has been expanding at a
solid pace.
While job gains have remained low, the
unemployment rate has been little
changed in recent months.
And inflation remains somewhat elevated.
Today, the FOMC decided to leave our
policy rate unchanged.
We see the current stance of monetary
policy as appropriate to promote
progress toward our maximum employment
and 2% inflation goals.
>> [clears throat]
>> The implications of developments in the
Middle East for the US economy are
uncertain.
We will remain attentive to risks to
both sides of our dual mandate.
And I'll have more to say about monetary
policy after briefly reviewing economic
developments.
Available indicators suggest that
economic activity has been expanding at
a solid pace.
Consumer spending has been resilient.
And business fixed investment has
continued to expand.
In contrast, activity in the housing
sector has remained weak.
In our summary of economic projections,
the median participant projects that
real GDP will rise 2.4% this year. And
2.3% next year.
Somewhat stronger than projected in
December.
In the labor market, the unemployment
rate was 4.4% in February and has
changed little since late last summer.
Job gains have remained low.
A good part of the slowing in the pace
of job growth over the past year
reflects a decline in the growth of the
labor force
due to lower immigration and labor force
participation,
though labor demand has clearly softened
as well.
Other indicators, including job
openings, layoffs, hiring, and nominal
wage growth, generally show little
change in recent months.
In our SEP, the median projection of the
unemployment rate is 4.4% at the end of
this year and edges down thereafter.
Inflation has eased significantly from
its highs in mid-2022,
but remains somewhat elevated relative
[clears throat] to our 2% longer-run
goal.
Estimates based on the consumer price
index and other data indicate that total
PCE prices rose 2.8%
over the 12 months ending in February,
and that excluding the volatile food and
energy categories, core PCE prices rose
3.0%.
These elevated readings largely reflect
inflation in the goods sector, which has
been boosted by the effects of tariffs.
Near-term measures of inflation
expectations have risen in recent weeks,
likely reflecting the substantial rise
in oil prices caused by the supply
disruptions in the Middle East.
Most measures of longer-term
expectations remain consistent with our
2% inflation goal.
The median projection in the SEP for
total PCE inflation this year is 2.7%
and 2.2% next year,
a bit higher than projected in December.
Our monetary policy actions are guided
by our dual mandate to promote maximum
employment and stable prices for the
American people.
At today's meeting, the committee
decided to maintain the target range for
the federal funds rate at 3 and 1/2 to 3
and 3/4%.
From last September through December, we
lowered our policy rate 3/4 of a
percentage point, bringing it within a
range of plausible estimates of neutral.
This normalization of our policy stance
should continue to help stabilize the
labor market while allowing inflation to
resume its downward trend toward 2%.
But, the implications of events in the
Middle East for the US economy are
uncertain.
In the near term, higher energy prices
will push up overall inflation, but it
is too soon to know the scope and
duration of the potential effects on the
economy.
We will continue to monitor the risks to
both sides of our mandate.
We are well positioned to determine the
extent and timing of additional
adjustments to our policy rate based on
the incoming data, the evolving outlook,
and the balance of risks.
In our SEP, FOMC participants wrote down
their individual assessments of an
appropriate path of the federal funds
rate under what each participant judges
to be the most likely scenario for the
economy.
The median participant projects that the
appropriate level of the federal funds
rate will be 3.4% at the end of this
year, and 3.1% at the end of next year,
unchanged from December.
As is always the case, these individual
forecasts are subject to uncertainty,
and they are not a committee plan or
decision.
Monetary policy is not on a preset
course, and we'll make our decisions on
a meeting-by-meeting basis.
To conclude,
the Fed has been assigned two goals for
monetary policy: maximum employment and
stable prices.
We remain committed to supporting
maximum employment, bringing inflation
sustainably to our 2% goal,
and keeping longer-term inflation
expectations well anchored.
Our success in delivering on these goals
matters to all Americans.
We at the Fed will continue to do our to
do our jobs with objectivity, integrity,
and a deep commitment to serve the
American people.
Thank you, and I look forward to your
questions.
Colby.
Thank you. Colby Smith of The New York
Times. There's been some debate about
whether the Fed should look through the
inflation that will come from higher oil
prices stemming from the Middle East
conflict. Is that the right approach at
this juncture? And to what extent does
the fact that inflation has been above
target for roughly 5 years now influence
the committee's thinking around this?
So,
uh
first let me say we're well aware of um
uh the performance of inflation over the
last few years and how a series of
shocks have uh have interrupted progress
that we've made over time.
And uh that happened most recently with
tariffs and then and now there will be
some effects on inflation coming
forward. Um
the the thing that's really important
that we see this year
is progress
uh on inflation through a reduction in
goods inflation as
the one-time effects on prices of
tariffs go through the system go through
the economy. That's the main thing we're
looking for going into this exercise.
And we need to be seeing that
uh to you know to sort of understand
that we actually are making progress
because on net we didn't make progress.
And if you look at total inflation,
sorry, total core inflation,
it's about 3% and some big chunk of that
between a half and three quarters is
actually tariffs. So, we're looking for
progress on that.
The question of whether we look through
uh the energy inflation doesn't really
arise until we have kind of checked that
box.
It of course is kind of standard
learning that you look through energy
shocks, but that's always been dependent
on on uh
inflation expectations remaining well
anchored. And I think now it's also
dependent on on what you mentioned,
which is that broader context of of 5
years now of inflation above target, we
have to keep all of those things in mind
and the question of looking through when
it does arise will be one to approach
not lightly, but you know, in in the
context that you mentioned.
And just on the SEP, [clears throat] can
you help us make sense of why there is
still a bias to cut for most officials
this year despite the upward revision to
headline and core inflation and the
essentially unchanged forecast for
growth and unemployment. Just curious
kind of what what's the genesis behind
the need what's the need for the cut?
Yeah, so you know, there are 19 people
and so 19 reasons, 19 individual
submissions. You know, but but it and if
you notice um the median didn't change,
but there was actually some movement
toward
a meaningful amount of movement toward
toward fewer cuts by by people. So four
or five people went from two to one,
let's say, two cuts to one cut. Um
and each person has individual
uh
you know,
stories behind behind what they want to
do, but essentially it is that, you
know, the the the the forecast is
that we'll be making progress on
inflation, not as much as we had hoped,
but some progress on inflation. It
should come as we start to see in the
middle of the year
uh progress on on tariffs, uh you know,
going through once and then the tariff
inflation coming down. That's we should
be seeing that. And, you know, the the
rate forecast is conditional on the
performance of the economy. So, if we
don't see that progress, then you won't
see the rate cut.
Uh Howard.
Uh thank [clears throat] you. Uh Howard
Schneider with Reuters. I just a
follow-up a little bit and to be clear,
um
is the higher inflation penciled in here
for 2026
solely the result of the oil shock or or
or something else?
So, that's going to be part of it. Uh
but, you know, that wouldn't be most of
core, right? So, the oil shock for sure
shows up here.
Some of that will be in core as well.
But, yes. But, no, there there's also
just just the the the feeling that we
haven't seen um you know, the progress
that we had hoped for on on core goods.
Uh and on on tariffs and on the rest of
it. You know, we've we've So, for
whatever reason, people did write up
their inflation forecast that will
certainly be tied to uh events in the
Middle East and the price of oil, but
it's also I think a reflection of
of um the slow progress we've seen on on
tariffs, which we believe we will see.
It's just a question of how long it
takes for them to get all the way
through the economy. And it takes it
just takes some time. Right. And is the
is the lack of change in the SEPs again
just to explicate this a little bit more
due to the expectation that the oil
portion of this will pass through
or more out of concern that there is a
potential blow
uh to consumption and growth coming in
the form of wealth effects with the
stock market down in the form of gas
prices, you know, uh uh diverting
spending from other parts of the
economy. Um So, I I on the I didn't get
the second part of your
>> that Well, that that consumers are going
to be potentially diverting money to
gasoline from other parts of the
economy. There could be a growth shock
uh or a redistribution of spending
there. There could be a consumption
wealth effects as well. Um I guess I'm
wondering, are you not Is the rate
forecast not changing because you think
the oil shock is going to be temporary
or because you want to be sure your
position is pace growth starts to slow.
>> So, when the thing I really want to
emphasize is that nobody knows, you
know, the economics effect could be
bigger, they could be smaller, they
could be much smaller or much bigger. We
just don't know. So, people are writing
down something that seems to make sense
to them, but have no conviction that's
that you know, to your point, if we have
high uh
you know, if we have a long period of
much higher gas prices, that's going to
weigh on consumption. That'll weigh on
disposable personal income. And it'll
weigh on consumption. But, we don't know
if that's going to happen. It it it
something quite different than that. We
might have much lower than expected
pass-through. So, people write down you
know, this is one of those SEPs where a
number of people mentioned if we were
ever going to skip a an SEP, this would
be a good one because
we just don't know. So, I I wouldn't say
there's a a conviction that this is
going to go through quickly or not
quickly. It's just you got to write
something down and this is something
that is
that people wrote down. Uh and
so and you know, we don't debate how
long and how do you do that? We wouldn't
be able to debate what the length of or
size of these effects would be. We just
have to kind of make an individual
statement and and you also you know,
what you've written down before will be
you'll be reluctant to move too far away
from that just because you don't know.
It's so unclear what the direction from
this particular end will be. Meanwhile,
the economy has the growth has been
solid and inflation that the overshoot
is mainly from from the goods and
tariffs
and you know, the labor market
is
the unemployment rate of course is
little changed since September.
You have very very low break-even rate
apparently for new jobs with little
growth in either demand or supply, but
the US economy is is doing
you know, pretty well. It's just we
don't know what the effects of this will
be and really no one does.
Steve.
Mr. In the past the staff has suggested
that
higher oil prices
they [clears throat] have a hit to
consumption which I was talking about,
but that's somewhat offset by increase
to domestic production. What if you
could talk about that dynamic especially
to the extent that how much US
production is is happening right now?
So,
the first thing is there is you know,
the original thinking
long-standing thinking put it that way
is that you do look through energy
shocks, but as I mentioned, that's
conditional on inflation expectations
and that kind of thing.
So, you Sorry, your question was The
What the staff is saying about and has
said in the past about
>> Yeah. So, there'd be an offset.
>> Offset Yeah. So, that's that's true. Uh
you know, we have um
we're a net exporter of energy, right?
So, any any effects on employment and
economic activity and spending would be
offset to some extent by the fact that
our our oil companies will be more
profitable and they may even do more
drilling. If you ask oil companies about
doing more drilling, though, they're
going to want to see, you know, an a a
consistent rate rise in oil prices from
where they were before the build-up for
the war.
Uh and they're going to and they're
going to want to believe that that's
going to be persistent for a fairly long
fairly long time. So, they're they're
not sitting there waiting for oil to go
over $70 a, you know, a barrel and then
they're going to start drilling or
whatever. They're going to They're going
to make a
a reasoned, careful judgment that we're
going to have higher oil prices for an
extended period, meaningfully higher.
So, you don't I wouldn't say there's
much of that happening. Not Not much of
will be happening now, but some of that
could happen over time if you see that,
but um so, the you know, the net of the
net of it would the net of it of the oil
shock will still be some downward
pressure on spending and employment and
and upward pressure on inflation, of
course. And if I could just follow up on
on Kobe's [clears throat] question,
how much do you worry that having looked
through tariff inflation and tariff
inflation running above target and
looking through the oil price shock
would undermine the credibility of your
commitment to the 2% target? You know,
we we have to do our analysis and and
and, you know, think these things
through carefully, but of course, that's
on everyone's mind, you know, we're
we're well aware of of the history and
uh but you don't want to overreact to
that, you know, you want to make the
best judgment you can based on on the
facts. We're not I don't think we're
going to let it
color our decision-making more than is
appropriate. It's It's more of the
thought that it's been 5 years and we've
actually had, you know, we had the
tariff shock, we had the pandemic uh and
and now we have an an energy shock of
some size and duration. We don't know
what that's going to be, actually. And,
you know, it's one of those things where
it's it's it's a repeated set of things
and you worry that that's the kind of
thing that can um
you know, can cause trouble for
inflation expectations. And and and so
we worry a lot about that and we're, you
know, we are very strongly committed to
uh to doing what it takes to to keep
inflation expectations anchored at 2%.
And, you know, I I think it's important
that we uh
that we do that, very important.
Nick.
Nick Timiraos, The Wall Street Journal.
Chair Powell, you've described monetary
policy as modestly restrictive. If the
unemployment rate is roughly stable,
inflation moving sideways in the high
twos, with an ongoing overshoot in
services and uh non-housing services,
not just goods, and the economy uh doing
fairly well as you as you just outlined,
what gives you confidence that inflation
returns to target over the next couple
of years? Okay. So, I I would say the
the rate is you can characterize it as
in the high end of neutral or you can
characterize characterize it as perhaps
mildly restrictive, even modestly
restrictive. No one knows for sure, but
it's in that range where it's somewhere
around the borderline between
restrictive and not. Um
remember that that a big part of the
disinflation we're looking for is just
the run-off of when when tariffs are put
into place, of course, what they do is
they raise prices to some extent, to the
extent those prices are are the tariffs
are paid by consumers
uh in a on a one-time basis. And we're
waiting for that that process. It takes
8, 9, 10, 11 months, a year to go to go
through the system. And we're waiting
for the tariffs, which were put in place
over the course of the middle part and
later uh later last year, we're waiting
for that to go through the system so
that goods inflation will return closer
to what it's always been. I mean, it
used to be for many many years it was
negative and then you know, the year
before tariffs came in it was zero and
it's running at like 2% now. So
and so that's kind of goods inflation is
running at 2%. So that's not coming from
standard Phillips curve restrictive
um you know, restrictive policy. It's
coming from the one run off of a
one-time thing. We also think it's
important though to keep policy either
mildly restrictive or you know, close to
that but not too restrictive because of
the weakness in the
downside risk in the labor market. We
are balancing these two goals in a
situation where the risks to the labor
market are to the downside, which would
call for lower rates and the risks to
inflation are to the upside, which would
call for higher rates. We're not cutting
anyway. So we're in a difficult
situation and we feel like we're
our framework calls on us to balance the
risks and we feel like where we are now
is just kind of on that borderline than
the higher borderline of of restrictive
versus uh
uh
not restrictive. We feel like that's the
right place to be.
Can I ask about core non-housing
services though?
>> [clears throat]
>> Uh because there are some people who
think that it hasn't come down very much
if at all over the past year. If if wage
growth has come down, if the labor
market has loosened, why has non-housing
services inflation maybe been slower to
follow? That's a good question.
It's you know, it's it's frustrating.
Labor non-housing services have they
basically moved sideways for a year.
They're at the same level. We do expect
that they will come down but you know,
it's it's a bunch of idiosyncratic
things but at the same time that that is
one of the things we should be seeing
because to your point, you know, the
labor market is clearly not a source of
inflationary pressures and that should
really matter for non-housing services,
but we're not seeing progress there. So,
we do you know, the what we expect for
next year is continued what we want to
see for this year rather is continued
progress on housing services.
Finally seeing that, you know, the goods
inflation come back down because the
one-time effects of tariffs are through
and then also get some help from
non-housing services. That's what we'd
like to see.
But it's, you know, it's a good question
why we didn't see much of that last
year.
Edward.
>> [clears throat]
>> Thanks, Chair Powell. Edward Lawrence
with Fox Business. So, in December we
saw employment numbers revised down to
-17,000. January revised down. February
posted a loss of 92,000. Is that Is Is
the employment side a far greater risk
than the inflation side? Because we are
seeing inflation CPI is close to 2%. PCE
has ticked down overall.
You know, it's really I wouldn't say
that. I wouldn't say that that's clear
at all that one is more at risk than the
other. So, you can you can point to the
unemployment rate being stable and you
know, in a world where both supply and
demand for workers have come down very,
very sharply over the course of the past
year due to immigration policy largely.
You know, a ratio is going to be a
better thing to look at than job
creation for example. So, and the ratio
is the unemployment rate and it's been
stable since September. So, that that
that tells you that. Inflation, you
know, you can you can
We're We're We're at We're at 3.0% core
inflation 2.8%
headline. So, we've been well above the
2%
that that amount, whatever it is. Uh
0.7, 0.8 or a full percentage point
above 2% for some time.
And that's a concern. You know, we need
to get back down to 2% and we need to
keep focused on that even though we do
now face some some new inflation from
energy. So, I
I'd be hard-pressed to say that one of
them is obviously more at risk than the
other.
And if I may, what happens uh
if there's [clears throat] no Federal
Reserve chairman confirmed on May 15th?
Would you stay on?
So, if my successor is not confirmed by
the end of my term as chair, I would
serve as chair pro tem until he is
confirmed.
Um
that is what the law calls for. Uh
that's what we've done on several
occasions, including involving me, and
it's what we're going to do in this
situation.
Uh and while I'm at it, um
on the question whether I will leave
while the investigation is ongoing, I
have no intention of leaving the board
until the investigation is well and
truly over with transparency and
finality, and I would refer you to the
statement that was in the Fed's brief
that you will all have seen. And I won't
have anything more for you on that.
On the question of whether I will then
continue to serve as a governor after my
term ends and after the investigation is
over, I have not made that decision yet.
Uh and I will make that decision based
on what I think is best for the
institution and for the people we serve.
Figuring you probably were going to set
the dominoes off there, Edward.
And I'm I'm not going to have any more
to say on those issues, by the way.
>> [clears throat]
>> Thank you very much. Claire Jones from
the Financial Times. Um
people have drawn quite a few historical
parallels with the current situation.
We've seen oil price shocks in the past.
Um some people have said the first Gulf
War and the Fed's response to that where
there was a focus on the growth risks um
is the right parallel. To what extent
would you agree with that and to what
extent do you think we're in a different
place today?
Thank you.
You know, we it's it's really hard to
say until we see the situation, the
actual situation. Um
in some circumstances, that might be the
right
uh case in fact. For example, if we do
see the kinds of uh of disinflationary
progress that we expect to see with due
due to tariffs that I mentioned.
Um I think it's hard to say and it will
depend to some extent on on the size and
duration of the effects we're seeing on
prices and and it will depend a lot on
uh, what we can see in inflation
expectations.
And just one follow-up if I may just on
the BLS report um, that was mentioned
briefly there. It doesn't seem from the
projections or from the comments you've
made today about the unemployment rate
and focusing on that that your view on
the labor market story to a large
probably in a supply-side story has
changed um, despite the quite negative
number in February. Would that be the
right take and was there anyone else in
the room who thought differently and
that the February jobs report was cause
for concern?
So, I think you have to take the take
the two together, you know, the um, you
know, in a way the uh,
January report was uh, a positive
surprise and the February report was a
negative surprise.
Uh, if you put them together,
you get something in the middle and I I
think you have to really as you do, I'm
sure realize there were there was a
strike and there was weather and that's
about 80,000 of the negative effect
total on the February report.
Notwithstanding that, so so what do you
what do you see if you take a step back
overall? There are a number of
indicators that suggest a degree of
stability,
but the thing that I I think um,
good number of people on the committee
are concerned about is just the very,
very low level of job creation. If you
if you adjust what has been the trend
job creation over the past, let's say, 6
months, if you adjust that for what we
think our staff thinks is the the
overstatement due to overcounting,
effectively, there's zero net job
creation in the private sector.
But actually, that looks like that's
about what the economy needs in terms of
of uh, dealing with very, very low
nonexistent really growth in the labor
force, which of course we've never had
in our in our history. So, you've got a
a sort of a a zero employment growth
equilibrium.
Now, that's that's balance, okay?
But, uh you know, I would say it it does
have a feel of downside risk, and uh
it's not kind of a really comfortable
balance. So, um you know, we look at
that, we see it, we get it, and I mean
everybody understands the arithmetic,
and that that's you you can say the
break even is is zero.
But, nonetheless, it's um it's something
we're watching carefully, and so and and
you know, our concern about, but
ultimately though,
you can argue that it's the a
consequence of deliberate deliberate
policy, which is really the changes to
immigration.
Is that's the biggest factor there, and
um
but nonetheless, something we watch
carefully.
Andrew.
Uh thanks, Chair Powell. Um
the economy's experienced a series of
supply shocks in the last few years. Uh
COVID, tariffs, two oil price shocks. Do
you think that is bad luck, or is
something changed in the world that
makes supply shocks more common, and
does the central bank need to take uh
start taking account of the risk of
supply shocks as more as a more common
problem?
You know, we we did go through a long
period where where the shocks were all
demand shocks, and uh you know, so we've
had a lot of practice thinking about
supply shocks in the last four or five
years, for sure.
Uh and it's just a very different thing,
and a very much more difficult thing,
because it does immediately raise the
question of
uh
tension between the two parts of our
mandate.
But, you know,
has the world changed? I mean, COVID
COVID is a one-time thing, right? Um
uh this energy sup- supply shock is a
one-time thing. It's not it's not
because of some broad tendency or
anything, I don't think. And and you
know, the the oil shock under with
Ukraine was also the a consequence of uh
of military action. So,
I don't know that I don't know that the
uh
the world has changed in a way that
there'll be more supply shocks, but uh
you know, there's people have written
that that paper and that speech
a number of times. Remember people have
tried to make the case that that is the
case and in fact, we have seen more
supply shocks
in the last 5 years than we've seen in
many years before that. It's a fact.
Okay. Um
you said last year that the Fed was
reviewing its communication strategies
including the SEP as part of its
framework review.
Um whatever happened to that and
I have like five follow-ups to that, but
yeah, I guess the you know, what what
would you change about Fed
communications if you had the time?
Thanks.
>> What happened about that was not much.
And I'll tell you why. So,
>> [clears throat]
>> you know, we we we we looked carefully
at many aspects of the SEP and of our
communications
and there [snorts] just weren't there
weren't any ideas that had very broad
support on the committee. And you don't
want you don't want to make a change to
your communications unless you have you
know, have the committee behind that.
So, we didn't really make any changes on
that. I you know, I I had hoped that
that some things that I wanted to do,
but they just they didn't attract broad
support and we'd already made all the
changes we made to the framework. That
was that was a critical thing.
So, we didn't and you know, I you know,
I I wish we had been able to do some
things, but you know, we didn't. So,
maybe the next year we'll we'll take a
look. I'm I'm sure he will.
Mike [clears throat] McKee
Michael McKee from Bloomberg Television
and Radio. The minutes show in January
some members of the committee wanted to
include a two-sided guidance on policy.
Was that discussed today and given the
rise in the inflation expectations, how
much support for
a two-sided policy warning would there
be?
So, it did come up today. The policy
that are the possibility rather that our
next move might be an increase did come
up at the meeting as it did at the last
meeting.
The vast majority of participants don't
see that as their base case
and of course, we don't they take things
off the table.
Uh but you you correctly characterized
you know, what was in the minutes that
that several participants indicated in
something very much like that
conversation did happen. What was your
second question now? Uh I was just one
one question there, but uh follow-up
would be
uh there are a lot of goods besides oil
that are trapped in the strait right
now, and a lot of supply chain's getting
snarled. Uh
how much concern do you have about
whether if this becomes an inflation
problem beyond just oil, whether there's
anything you can do about it or would do
about it uh given
the efficacies of monetary policy?
You know, we you can you can worry about
other commodities. You can worry about
all of the ways that
oil commodities oil-related commodities
go into manufacturing and that kind of
thing. The truth is it's completely out
of our hands, and we just like everybody
else, we have to just wait and and see
what happens, and it'll be it'll come
down to how long uh
you know, the
current situation lasts, and then what
are the effects on
on prices, and then how do consumers
react and that kind of thing. Really, we
we I wouldn't speculate in any way, and
there's really not a lot we can do other
than kind of
watch and and see.
Maria Luisa
Afternoon, Chair Powell. Maria Luisa
Capurro with Bloomberg News. I wanted to
ask you you've said longer-term measures
of inflation expectations reflect
confidence that the Fed will get back to
its 2% goal, but there are some
colleagues of yours who have pointed to
higher dispersion in household surveys
and business levels as well. So, I I and
that they take as a signal that
inflation expectations may be less
sticky than in the past. I'm wondering
if there was a discussion around that at
this meeting across the committee,
uh and what were the views of what is
the state of inflation expectations and
the risks of for from higher oil and gas
prices? So, at this meeting, I mean,
a number of people mentioned and and
staff briefed on short-term expectations
having moved up quite a lot for reasons
we understand well. But, long-term
expectations, you know, you you can
always find one that's troubling or some
aspect of one that's troubling, but
ultimately right through this whole
period, uh, the overwhelming majority of
the things we look to, including
markets, including surveys of, you know,
of the public and also of, um, of
forecasters, they they've all been
pretty solid on longer-term inflation
expectations being right where they need
to be, consistent with 2%. Uh, so, that
continues to be the case. We didn't We
didn't have a a lot of conversation
about that. I think everyone does agree
that, you know, we'll be watching those
extremely carefully as we see the
effects of the, uh, of the price
increases come through from the from the
conflict. And still on on
[clears throat] how the discussion went
across the committee,
um,
before coming to this meeting, there
were some members who were like
discussing the risks of, uh, slow a
slowdown in growth and at time at a time
of where inflation remains high. It
really doesn't seem that most members
are penciling in a slowdown in growth,
No. but, uh, has there been any
discussion of the risks of stagflation
at this point? So, people actually wrote
up their their, um, growth forecast by
by a tenth and that I think that's
probably to do with just growing
confidence in in, um, productivity.
Um, and, uh,
but so, it's sorry, and your second
question was just,
um,
if there have been any discussions about
the risk of stagflation, a stagflation
scenario.
>> Yeah, so,
as I mentioned, there there is tension
between the two goals, right? The up
upward upward risk for inflation and a
downward risk for employment. So, and
that puts us in a different situation.
You know, when we use the term
stagflation, I always have to point out
that that that was a 1970s term at a
time when unemployment was in double
figures and inflation was really high
and the misery index was super high. Add
them together, you get the misery index,
and that's not the case right now. We
actually have unemployment really close
to longer-run normal.
And we have inflation that's, you know,
one percentage point above that. So,
calling that stagflation, it's not, you
know, I would reserve the term
stagflation for,
you know, a much more serious set of
circumstances. That is not the situation
we're in. What we have is some tension
between the goals and we're trying to
manage our way through it. It's a very
difficult situation, but it's nothing
like what they faced in in the 1970s and
that's I reserve stagflation for that,
the word for that period. Maybe that's
just me.
Elizabeth.
Thanks so much. Elizabeth Schulze with
ABC News. President Trump says that oil
prices and overall inflation will go
down very rapidly as soon as the war
ends. Do you agree with that? I don't
have a forecast on that. I I don't When
we're thinking about the impact on
American households, you as you know,
they've been facing these higher prices
for years. They've seen an almost $1
increase in gas. How worried are you
about households, especially
lower-income families being able to
afford those price hikes? And should
people be bracing for higher costs,
including for food now?
Yeah, we just we don't know how big
these effects are going to be and I
don't I don't want to characterize them
in any way. Of course, people are
already seeing gas prices. Gas prices
are up almost a dollar a gallon. Um we
do we we hope that isn't for a long
period of time and of course people will
feel that, but I I don't want to
speculate about what that might mean
because honestly, that would sound like
I have some idea of what's actually
going to happen and I don't think
anybody really does. We're going to see
how this works out. And uh I just would
leave it at that.
Victoria.
>> [clears throat]
>> Hi, Victoria Guida with Politico. Um I
just wanted to ask for purposes of the
next meeting, uh you know,
how the Middle East war develops between
now and then. How are you thinking about
what might guide action at your next
meeting? I mean, if if we have oil
prices, you know, above $100 a barrel
the entire time until the next meeting,
is that going to change your
wait-and-see stance? Like, what
what would lead you all to move, or is
uh
it it it are you on a hold pretty
indefinitely?
We'll have to wait and see. Um
I mean,
you know, um we always say we're going
to learn more by the next meeting,
and usually we do. But, in this case,
we're going to learn a lot because we're
going to learn 6 weeks to the day till
the next meeting. And um
you know, we're going to see whether the
what happens is it's going to be very
important for the way the economy looks
and the way the outlook uh
the way the outlook evolves
with what happens in Middle East. That's
going to be a big factor, and we'll know
that then. I don't know how it's going
to affect our thinking. I really don't.
And I you know, you
we did we did talk about alternative
scenarios a little bit, but it's just I
wouldn't bring that in here. It's it's
very uncertain, and I I just want to
just remember that we don't know, and we
shouldn't assume it's going to be one
thing or another. We're going to see.
So, is it is it a matter of you don't
know how the situation itself is going
to evolve, or even if things remain as
they are, the economy could still remain
relatively durable in in face of them?
Yeah, that's true, too. No, I mean,
the US economy has has just,
you know, made it's it's been strong
through
a whole bunch of challenges. I mean, if
you go back go back to 2023 when we
raised rates a lot in '22 and '23, and
close to 100% of economists called for a
recession, which didn't happen. In fact,
2023 was a really strong year. So,
uh
I
the US economy has has really been just
just um
doing pretty well through a lot of
significant challenges over the past few
years. It's been amazing to see.
And I again, I I don't I don't know
what's going to happen in the next
intermediate cycle, and I don't know
what's going to happen in the Middle
East. I wouldn't want to speculate.
>> [clears throat]
>> Hi, Chair Powell. Thanks for taking our
questions. Um what makes you so certain
that tariff-related price increases will
be a one-time effect? I don't think
we've seen you since the Supreme Court
tariff decision.
Um and it's pretty clear that
none of us know what the extent of the
tariff shock will be as the
administration moves to replace some of
the tariffs that were overturned. So, I
suppose I'm curious what would make you
question this certainty that tariffs are
going to be a one-time price effect?
Well, I I I would not at all use the
word certain about my head but my views
on that. I'm not I'm not certain. I'm
uncertain.
But [clears throat] just if you think
about what it is, you're it's a it's a
one-time increase in the price of a
good, right? And what inflation is is,
you know, ongoing increases in prices
this year, next year, the year after.
That's what inflation is. It's not a
one-time price increase. There's a very,
very big difference. The public doesn't
really focus on that, but that's what
that's the difference. And tariffs
should be a, you know, in theory, unless
they cause people to start expecting
still more tariffs the next year and
still more tariffs the next year,
they should be a classic one-time thing.
People say the same thing traditionally
about an energy price spike, because
traditionally prices go up and they come
back down. And by the time monetary
policy would react, you know, you would
uh
it would it would be over. So, I don't
have tons of confidence on that. I I
mean, I think the the theory is probably
right. Um but as usual, the the time it
takes to get all the way through the
economy is just very uncertain. And we
you know, we found that coming out of
COVID that the inflation did go away and
largely for the reasons we thought it
would, but it took 2 years longer than
we thought.
You know, and um so I I think we have to
be humble about knowing how long it will
take for
tariffs to go all the way through the
economy. And so, what we've been doing
as our our staff's been doing
uh it's very interesting. They, you
know, they started off with just an
estimate because there wasn't a real
history. And then they've built based on
the history that they're seeing of
tariffs coming through into prices.
Um they've now they can now have an arc
and for all the tariffs, they can say,
well, you know, so we have I think a
slight slightly more confidence that we
will see tariff inflation coming down.
Not prices, but you won't see further
increases, and we should start seeing
that
uh more and more in the middle parts of
the year. We do expect that. Um now,
you're also right though that the the
level of of tariffs came down fairly
meaningfully in the wake of the
uh in the wake of the court decision,
but but the administration said they're
going to they're going to move the
they're going to get that rate right
back up to where it was. So, and we we
you know, we we assume that they'll do
that over time.
So, um that's how we think about it.
Thank you.
Chris Rugaber.
Hi. Uh thank you. Uh Chris Rugaber,
Associated Press. I wanted You talked
about the shortcomings of the SEP in
this environment. I
wanted to ask about or throw in an
additional thing, which is the fact that
it's happening before a transition.
Is there still some value perhaps in the
public knowing what
other Fed officials are thinking, uh the
ones who will stay on for the rest of
the year and beyond, and
does that even handicap your successor
in any way?
Well, just in terms of having a whole
committee expressing its views,
is that something that locks them in for
the rest of the year? No. No, no. We
never The SEP is never uh
people are more than happy to change
their their SEP dots. They're no way
bound by them. You know, it's it's it's
your opinion at a moment in time,
which can change based on events, you
know, sometimes very quickly. Um
so uh it doesn't it never locks people
in. You know, people are more than happy
to be proven wrong
in either direction. And uh so I I I
just think we do it. And you know, we
This was I mentioned this was a time
when it's very hard to do it. During the
pandemic, we actually took one meeting
off, I think. And but you know, we don't
want we don't like to do that just
because it's hard to do. We should just
keep doing it. And but I just would say
for this one though,
I think it's yeah, it's more than even
more than usual good to take it take the
forecast with a grain of salt because
subject to
just very high levels of uncertainty.
>> [clears throat]
>> Brian.
Hi, Chair Powell. Uh Brian Cheung with
NBC News. Uh so, you mentioned at the
beginning of this conversation that
you're well aware of the history of
inflation running above target. It seems
like that might be what's underpinning
the affordability problem that we're
hearing a lot about on Main Street. Are
there any signs to you that that's
impacting the psychology of the
consumer, especially given that they're
a big driver of overall economic
activity?
I You know, I'm not sure what's what
that's all about, but I what I'll tell
you what I think and what we see in
surveys, and that is
you know, people's there were big price
increases
um all around the world, by the way.
Everywhere in in countries like the
United States had basically the same
kind of thing. It was a global inflation
coming out of the pandemic.
And everywhere people are feeling like
they, you know, real wages have been
going up in the United States now for 3
years, roughly. Um but people are not
feeling like they're not feeling good
about it yet. And it will take some
years of positive real real earning
gains for people to feel good again, we
think. But you're right. We
But we when you talk to people they're
they they do feel squeezed. And you
know, there there areas where where uh
>> [clears throat]
>> prices are still going up, like
insurance, various different kinds of
insurance are getting more more and more
expensive. And that's just catching up
really from inflationary pressures that
take a while to get to the price into
the price. So, we take it very
seriously. We don't dismiss it at all.
It's a very real thing from the
standpoint of what um of what people are
experiencing. And And you know, it what
it does for us is
you know,
it makes us even more committed, if
that's possible, to getting inflation
back to 2% on a sustained basis. How
does the Fed's independence play into
the ability [clears throat] to address
affordability?
Well, independence is what allows us to
do our jobs. And um you know, stable
prices is half of our mandate. It's one
of our two mandates, maximum employment
being employment being the other. I
mean, I every look at every uh advanced
economy that looks anything like the
United States anywhere in the world in a
market economy, in a democracy, and
you'll see, you know, pretty much
uh
Fed central bank independence that looks
a lot like, in some cases, stronger than
what we have. But it's critical that we
have that so that we can do the things
when we need to do them to preserve
price stability.
And it just it's it's an accepted
standard practice, and I think has a lot
of support certainly in Congress, which
is where where our oversight is, is in
Congress.
And you see that among Democrats and
Republicans in the House and the Senate.
Mr. Chairman,
>> [clears throat]
>> That's the bear.
Hi Chair Powell, Richard Eskibedo at CBS
News. Thanks for doing this.
Um I two questions. One, how high would
oil prices and broader inflation have to
go and for how long for the committee to
consider hiking rates?
Uh and then secondly, diesel prices are
rising faster than gas prices. How
concerned are you that the increase in
diesel might drive up food and goods
prices and lead to broader inflation?
Yeah, I I I'm not going to give you an
example example or specific answer on
the first question. You know, we we
we're prepared to do what needs to be
done, but I wouldn't want to hypothesize
about what that what that might be. You
know, in terms of diesel prices prices
um
what say your question there is are we
concerned about it? I mean How concerned
and and whether or not it will drive up,
you know, the cost of food and and other
goods that really rely on it to So we I
think it's it's a more general concern
than that. It's diesel prices because
that's that's transportation of food and
things like that. There are just lots of
ways that that oil and derivatives of
oil get into the production and
transportation of many many things. So
and those you know, they're big effects
on in headline inflation, but things
like that leak into core as well. And
then the the the
the effects may not be as big, but
they're quite real and they're they're
material. So we we are aware of that and
we're watching it, but you know, we're
right at the beginning of this and
we don't know how big it you just don't
know how big this will be and how long
it lasts. You know, it may or may not be
something that really makes a big
imprint on the US economy. We're just
going to have to wait and see.
Thank you.
Arty for the last question.
>> [clears throat]
>> Thanks very much. Just to sort of stare
into the future for a little bit. I was
looking at the longer run bits of the
SEP. I noticed that the growth estimate
had been revised up a good chunk from
from 1.8 to 2 and the the kind of
long-term fed funds rate as well. It'd
be great just to hear is that is that AI
productivity or or what's going on there
exactly? Yeah, I well I think it's it's
just productivity. You know, we actually
started seeing
meaningfully higher productivity some
years ago, four four years ago, five
years ago. And and and that's not
because of, you know, generative AI.
It's it may we we'll never we won't know
for years what it's really due to, but
it could be due to the kind of things
that people did during the pandemic to
economize and and somehow become more
productive because there was a, you
know, an incredible labor shortage. But
um and I you know,
I think
economic forecasters are very skeptical
of
of uh
periods of high productivity cuz they're
so rare and they're often revised away.
And for many of us to I never thought
I'd see this many years of really high
productivity and by the way, expected to
continue.
And we haven't really started to see the
the effects of of generative AI and that
should that should certainly contribute
to that. So,
it's quite unusual and and it's you
know, this is the higher productivity is
the thing that allows incomes to rise
over time.
And so it's a great thing. Was that your
question? Yeah, I know I was just
curious what lay behind that. And and
just briefly to on on that as well to
finish up,
you hear the argument a lot this is all
disinflationary story and if you believe
that productivity thing, that should
also weigh down inflation over time.
Maybe then kind of pull down where where
rates end up. Do you do you kind of
agree with that line of thinking or what
do you think do you think that's not how
you should think about whether rates I
think you have to be cautious about that
in particular if you're talking about AI
about generative AI. So, remember in the
short term what's happening is we're
building data centers everywhere and
that's actually putting pressure on
on um
all kinds of goods and services that go
into building these things. So, that's
actually probably pushing inflation up
at the margin. Um in addition uh
um it it probably raises the neutral
rate. So, in in the in the near term
you're looking at you're not looking at
something that would immediately call
for lower rates or that would be
lowering inflation. Over time though,
sure, it's a it can be a if it's extent
it's expanding potential output, which
is what productivity higher productivity
does, then it actually can be. But I
think it's an empirical question because
it's really what is the demand demand
growing faster or slower than the supply
side. And I I think it it we just don't
know that that answer ex ante going in.
Uh we'll just have to wait and see.
Thank you very much.
The chairman of the Federal Reserve. If
there was a good meeting to scrap the
forecast, then this one was probably it.
The chairman deemphasizing the
projections, reemphasizing the
uncertainty, focused on the shock in the
Middle East. We had one question, how
would they respond to it? Would they
look through it? The answer, it's not
that simple. Equities in response
negative, new session lows right now
down 1% on the S&P 500, likewise on the
Nasdaq. And the bond market, twos, tens,
and 30s, yields higher, particularly at
the front end of the yield curve up by
seven basis points on a two-year 3.75.
If you, like me, thought this would be
boring, this was not a snooze. The
Federal Reserve chair asked about
succession. Take a listen to what he had
to say.
If my successor is not confirmed by the
end of my term as chair, I would serve
as chair pro tem until he is confirmed I
have no intention of leaving the board
until the investigation is well and
truly over with transparency and
finality. On the question of whether I
will then continue to serve as a
governor after my term ends and after
the investigation is over, I have not
made that decision yet. Three points
from the chairman of the Federal
Reserve. Let's go through them
individually. Point one, I will stay on
as chair until a successor is confirmed.
Point two, I have no intention of
leaving the Fed while the DOJ
investigation is ongoing. And point
three, even after that is complete, I
haven't made a decision on how long I'll
stay on. A big headline in that news
conference.
>> He actually engaged with the question.
We all were wondering whether he would
give some sort of clarity and we've got
it. He is going to be the Fed chair
until Kevin Warsh is in the seat.
There's this question of what as well
and truly over in terms of the
investigation actually mean. A lot of
people are going to be wondering that.
And the fact that he hasn't made a
decision yet, what is going to tip the
scales for him to understand when he can
make the decision either way. This
wasn't a boring news conference in any
way, shape or form.
>> If we can bring up just an intraday
chart the front end of the yield curve.
So bring up the two-year intraday and
just have a look at where things started
to pick up. The Fed chair throughout
this news conference was leaning into
anchoring inflation expectations. That
was notable. But we started to really
bounce out to session highs when he
started to lean into that question about
his future. And I just wonder Bramer, we
can have that conversation with guests
over the next 15 minutes or so whether
those two things are connected to some
extent. I don't On the margins, this
market seems to be treating a Kevin
Warsh Fed as being more dovish simply
because we have President Trump tweeting
or true socialing every single day
saying,
"Too late. Powell needs to lower rates."
Right now you see there is no full rate
cut getting priced into the Fed funds
futures until June of next year. So
that's how far we've pushed it on. There
was a one-two punch. For Fed chair Jay
Powell also said it's too so soon to
know the full economic effects from the
Middle East. And then he said he would
stay on and we have known this is a
pretty balanced Fed. They're weighing
the risks and clearly the specter of
2022 hangs over his Fed chairmanship.
Okay, you'll go out to to you'll go out
to the specter of the new view forward.
I like what Liz Ann Saunders has
re-tweeted Claudia Sahm. Finally, Powell
throws the SCP under the bus. Skip it.
Thank you, Dr. Sahm
for that. My observation, John, is it's
10:21 p.m. in Doha
and I'm looking at the headlines while
the chairman's speaking and I get the
Warsh view forward in the crystal ball
gazing out six months. I think we got to
gaze out 24 hours right now. That's the
tension I see in the Iran the Iran
headlines that we get out of Tel Aviv
and we're getting out of Dubai right now
from Bloomberg.
>> This is why it makes it so difficult to
provide forecasts in a moment like this
one. And the chairman quite rightly
talked about the need for humility. The
duration of this shock.
>> Yes. Energy assets are in play in the
minds of some people now after the
strikes we saw on Iranian energy assets
just earlier this morning. Crude at the
moment at 109 on Brent WTI around 98.
The chairman is well aware that they've
missed their inflation target for the
previous five years. Overwhelmed by a
series of shocks and this is another
one. Now you may still believe
ultimately this Federal Reserve will
look through this shock, but that wasn't
a chairman that wanted to make that
point in this specific news conference.
>> want to say the T word even though
essentially this forecast would suggest
transitory. He tried to play the part of
an oil expert. He tried to play the part
of a generative AI expert, but
nonetheless [clears throat] he said it
is too soon to say so many times over
again that we lost count. They are
facing off with a series of shocks with
the backward view of what happened in
the post-pandemic era where you had
inflation that creeped up to 9%. He will
not want to continue that especially
with core PCE creeping higher in the
wrong direction before even getting this
out of the way.
>> to me John, I know we got to get to Dr.
Sluck, but the headline to me was the
lack of dissent. I mean this was very
Greenspanian. Everybody on the same page
supporting this chairman.
>> They stand by their TK. And for our
listeners and our audience worldwide
just tuning in, the decision dropped
about an hour and a half ago.
The interest rate remained unchanged.
The median dot still implied one cut for
this year. Lots of noise though beneath
those headlines. The outlook for growth
was better. The outlook for inflation
was higher, but that single dissent was
Governor Bowman. And Governor Waller was
expected to dissent. He sat around this
table only a week two weeks ago and said
it depends on the the jobs report. An
hour later the jobs report came in way
weaker than expected and we all thought
we know what the governor's going to do.
He's going to vote for an interest rate
reduction and then he didn't. And that's
off the back of the shock in the Middle
East and that's more than notable.
Governor Chris Waller I think is
arguably the most interesting person on
the Fed right now in terms of what his
decision actually was driven by. I'm
curious if he comes out and says he is
getting spooked by the direction of core
PCE. He's getting spooked by the
component of what oil prices do to that.
And we talk about wage inflation. Wage
inflation is still running above where
it was in the pre-pandemic period.
>> And and John I I was looking at F1 in
Japan here and you said do something
serious. So I looked at the price of oil
here as you mentioned earlier. Brent
crude up 81% from whatever the bottom
was. Saudi light Persian Gulf
>> The physical market 145%
same number. 80% 145.
>> It's the point that Jeff Currie of
Carlyle was making a little bit earlier
on this morning. There's a big gap right
now between the physical market Yeah.
where spot is trading and the paper
market and he thinks it needs to close.
He thinks the paper market needs to wake
up to the real risk emerging in the
Middle East. That's one opinion one
view. Other people aren't as concerned
but ultimately that's his opinion.
>> Every oil strategist that comes on says
why is everybody else so complacent and
what we're seeing is really a different
scenario than we've ever seen before.
And a lot of people say yeah yeah yeah
you guys always get it wrong. And so
ultimately this debate will continue to
play
>> What did we say a few weeks ago? If you
want to make a fool of someone on Wall
Street ask for a crude forecast. That's
always been the way. It's the hardest
thing to forecast. Torsten Slok is not a
fool. He joins us from Apollo. Torsten
good afternoon. Good to see you. Good to
see you. You've had some time to go
through this one. Your big reaction
please. Well I think one interesting
thing here is that if we begin to
describe everything as another shock
there's another shock there's another
shock and we're looking through that. It
almost make it sound like well I don't
really have to react to anything because
I've identified well now there's just
another shock coming along in oil
prices. There was another shock from
trade war. There was another shock from
COVID. It makes it sound like that you
should never do anything as a central
banker. So, now we have a shock that is
very serious and it's very, very clear
that they decided to just basically
completely ignore the Middle Eastern
shock that we're facing here. So, from
that perspective, it is quite
interesting as Lisa is saying, why was
it that Waller suddenly changed his
mind? Because it must be that he did put
more weight on the Middle Eastern and
the Iranian shock than what the average
committee member did here. Do you think
that you can infer anything from the
price action as John was laying out the
idea that two-year yields and 10-year
yields inflected upward as uh Fed Chair
Jay Powell said that he planned to stay
on should there not be uh another Fed
Chair nominated and in the seat by the
time his term expired.
>> Absolutely. Let Let's just talk about it
the way it is. At the last meeting,
there were 10 people voting for interest
rates to stay on changed. At this
meeting, there were now 11 people voting
for interest rates to stay on changed.
It's very clear, Stephen Iran at both
meetings voted for rates being lower,
but at this instance, when he suddenly
now says, I may be staying on until this
is well and truly investigated and
complete, the risk is beginning to rise
that well, maybe we'll have another
hawkish member sitting for a longer
period and assuming therefore that Trump
will appoint a more dovish member, that
does of course lean more towards that we
will have a more hawkish fit if he does
stay on for longer period.
>> hawkish. Why is he considered hawkish?
Well, he's hawkish relative to the
alternative of a more dovish member
coming along.
You were weighted Deutsche Bank under
Focus Land Out with Adam Sieminski and
Paul Sankey. Their back of the report
Excel spreadsheet was absolutely
definitive about the supply and demand
of hydrocarbons. Take that experience
now and how do you apply that Apollo
when you look at the American economy?
Well, it's very clear when you think
about demand and supply in oil that the
supply equation just changed quite
dramatically now that we suddenly have
much less supply because of the Strait
of Hormuz being closed and of because
all the cascade of effects that are
likely to come along if this does
continue for a longer period. So, on the
supply side, we will likely continue to
have the very important question, namely
how long time is going to last before we
get supply up to the levels where demand
is. And if that's going to take a longer
time, then the risk is that energy
prices and oil prices are going to stay
more elevated. It's also a fuel prices,
of course, that are of course going to
jet fuel. It's also, of course, fuel
prices that are marine fuel. All these
parts of energy complex are absolutely
seeing some upward lift, and the longer
the shock lasts, the more we will see
energy prices stay more elevated.
>> this get real for you? At the start of
this crisis, and we can call it that,
people came on Bloomberg Surveillance,
on Bloomberg TV, and made the point that
if it's days, not weeks, it's okay. And
here we are more than 2 weeks into this,
and now we hear if it's weeks, and not
months, it's okay. When is it not okay?
Well, the next one will probably be
people saying if it's months, and not
quarters, then we will also have a
change. So, [clears throat] you're
absolutely right. The fear is, of
course, that if this continue at the Fed
level, if you put this into purpose, the
Fed's model of the US economy, it has to
last at least one quarter, because
that's the only way you can get a real
serious shock to begin to feed through.
If it begins to last, of course, several
quarters, then it's a much more serious
effect. But it is ultimately about that
duration question, and that's what the
market is trying to figure out, and the
Fed very clearly told you today that
they do not think that this is going to
last a long time. Mike McKee, in the
news conference, is running back out for
us. Mike, welcome back to the program.
Some key headlines in that news
conference. What jumped out for you?
Well, I think two things, John. One,
there was a sort of more humble aspect
to what Jay Powell was saying when it
came to tariff price inflation, and he
was a conceding that it wasn't doing
what they thought it would do, lasting
longer than they had anticipated. And
now, layer on top of that, inflation
that will come into the energy markets,
and perhaps others, because of oil. And
so, he he he he was less saying the idea
that, well, we're prepared to go either
way, depending on what happens with the
economy, as he was saying, we've been
fooled, and we're not going to put
ourselves in that position. We're going
to sit back and wait, so that we don't
uh react wrong, because we've been
wrong. The other thing, of course, was
what Powell said about whether he's
staying on or not because he's refused
to talk about that so far. He did
acknowledge what his lawyers told the
the Department of Justice in the in
their deposition. But the most
interesting thing was he said he's
staying as chairman pro tem, and that's
the law. Well, there's a presidential
counsel's office memorandum that says
no, it's the president who can appoint
somebody as the chair pro tem. So, we
could be looking at another big legal
fight down the road if they don't get
Kevin Warsh in there by May 15th.
>> Yeah, Mike, this is why the problems
arise
with the chairman really engaging in
this topic this afternoon. Does it
provide consistency or just introduce
even more controversy?
>> [clears throat]
>> Well, he's trying to provide
consistency, I suppose, by saying not
much is going to change until my
successor gets here. But whether or not
that's a shot at the president or some
sort of way to push back on the pressure
he's been getting, we don't really know.
But at this point,
you have to think the White House is
going to disagree with that
interpretation of who's chairman pro
tem. Now, it's important to realize,
too, that the chairman pro tem of the
Board of Governors is largely irrelevant
for a short period of time until they
get Kevin Warsh
confirmed. It's staying as chair of the
Open Market Committee that would really
bother the president because as Torsten
was saying, leave somebody who's more
hawkish, more likely to vote for a hold
on the board. Mike McKee with the
latest. Thank you, sir. Appreciate it.
Great job, as always. Mike there at the
Federal Reserve down in Washington, D.C.
Torsten, can you answer that question?
We've touched on it briefly with you.
Just expand on it. Does it provide
consistency or introduce controversy?
Well, it would definitely be a lot
cleaner if you have a Fed chair, and
then that Fed chair walks out, and a new
Fed chair sits down, and then we
continue with a new Fed chair. That's
how it usually works. That's how it
normally is. That's how it was under
Greenspan, under under Yellen, under
Bernanke. But now that you suddenly have
this issue that the existing Fed chair,
either he may stay on the committee,
which is also a huge issue, or we may
not have Kevin Warsh in that seat. And
as Mike was just saying, that will raise
all these other legal issues around
whether this something that you can do
or not do. And that of course begins to
just raise a lot more uncertainty about
Fed independence and what is the
institution making of decisions. Do you
think that it's leading market
participants to not take into account
some of the forward guidance or some of
the discussions on the Fed that there is
less credibility as a result of some of
the increasing political rhetoric around
this institution?
>> Well, I think that we are moving towards
a Fed where the focus will be at the
extreme on dissents. And today we had 11
versus one. That was very clear. But
going forward, we are likely going to
have, especially over the next several
quarters as other FOMC members might be
leaving, we will have much more scrutiny
of what are the existing members saying,
what's the differences in speeches,
what's the differences in footnote
between someone who was dovish, someone
was hawkish. We are entering an era of
Fed watching where things are getting
much more complicated because it has
this political dimension of why is this
person saying this? Is this person
staying on the committee for political
reasons? It just opens up a whole
different dimension to Fed watching than
what we've been used to for a long time.
parlor game. But you're expert at this.
On a global basis, the central banker of
the world, to borrow from Bill Rhodes,
Jerome Powell has to look at the varying
energy intensities. With Brent crude at
nearly 110 a gallon, we've gone 106 to
109 here. At right now, I've headlines
on the Bloomberg. When you look at the
the way EM is crushed by these prices,
food, energy, and the and the rest that
you're expert at, Torsten, does the
dialogue just shift from the
conventional parlor game? Well, there's
been discussion you know about the swap
lines. There's been discussion about in
the broader context of things, what is
the Fed's mandate? And is the Fed's
mandate to take care of the US economy
and the people who live with within the
US 50 states, or is this someone who is
supposed to take care of the global
economy? And it's very clear that the
trend of travel here is certainly seems
to be that we're moving towards that the
Fed should really be caring mainly about
the US economic
Is it expressive currency? Is that what
we're not seeing in the Q2? Well, given
that foreigners own roughly around 20%
of treasuries, 20% of credit, and
roughly a third of course also of
equities, we still have a situation
where foreigners do play a very
important role in US financial markets.
So, that key issue of what is the goal
of the Fed becomes very, very important.
I'm just struck by how historic this is.
The last person to stay on at the
at the Federal Reserve as Fed chair
after his term was Marriner Eccles. This
was in 1948 when his term was up, and he
stayed on because he was concerned about
the post-Bretton Woods order and an
economy that was torn from the war that
we had just seen, and he wanted that
consistency. That was the last time this
happened, and I just struck by the
historical parallel at a time when we
are questioning geopolitical alliances,
when we're questioning how exactly some
of these monetary policies are going to
work in an inflationary world at a time
of increased government debt. It is
interesting that we're dealing with the
same discussions, and I think it can't
be forgotten the sort of echoes that we
feel from 1948.
>> I think it's easy to introduce one's
opinion into this situation, so I'll
just allow the market to guide us.
Clearly, the chairman is concerned about
a threat to independence.
Is he right to be?
Look at inflation expectations right
now. Market-based inflation expectations
have remained really well anchored
throughout all of this.
So, whether you're concerned about the
chairman's attack on the institution or
not, let's just focus on the markets.
Markets have decided it's not a credible
threat.
So, does the chairman actually have a
role here that he needs to play? Is this
a card he needs to hand
to hold? I I don't really understand
that. I'm struggling with that. That's
something I'm wrestling with.
My opinion doesn't really matter. The
market's telling me there isn't a
concern with Central Bank independence.
The market is telling me there isn't a
concern with inflation expectations, and
the data is telling me that the rest of
the world's not worried either because
when I look at foreign ownership of US
assets,
they're rock-solid, and for treasuries,
I think they're at all-time highs at the
last data point I saw, Torsten. So, is
there a problem here that the chairman
even needs to address? Well, that's why
the key question becomes what does
confidence mean? Is it confidence by Jay
Powell? Is it confidence by foreigners?
Is it confidence by markets? It does
become a very important debate. That's
why this discussion around who would be
the next Fed chair. Now, we know it's
Kevin Warsh. There was around that time
also a lot discussion around it could
have been someone else who might not
have been perceived as credible as Kevin
is. So, for that reason, I completely
agree. Who is the judge ultimately of
what Fed credibility is, and where do we
look, and where does the market look for
evidence whether Fed credibility is
being threatened?
>> And look how many establishment figures
came out when Kevin Warsh was nominated
by the president. How many establishment
figures and and forgive me if you're
insulted by being establishment. Ken
Rogoff, formerly at the IMF. I don't
think it gets more establishment than
that, endorsing Kevin Warsh and saying
he'd make a great Fed chair. Mark Carney
of Canada,
the former governor of the Bank of
England and now prime minister,
endorsing Kevin Warsh as a future Fed
chair. What exactly is the chairman
defending here when it is standard
protocol to leave once your term is up?
Well, I think that that's a fair
question, and ultimately
my personal opinion doesn't matter.
Frankly, I don't know what my personal
opinion is. I just think that there is a
sense right now in markets to the point
that Fed chair Jay Powell made that even
on Congress's level, they have
confidence and they would like to see
Fed independence continue. And that's
you see in Tom Tillis's move. So, what
would make him stay on? I guess that
that's one of the questions. What would
change his mind to actually remain on
his governor past his term as Fed chair
if Kevin Warsh were in the seat, that
would make him feel like he needed to
uphold this Fed independence.
>> Jeff Rosenberg of BlackRock joins us now
for more. Jeff, I imagine you want to
avoid this topic altogether. So, I'll
ask you about the substance of the news
conference, the shock from the Middle
East, and whether it threatens to upend
the outlook for this economy.
Yeah, I mean, look, the the conclusion
here on the on the substance really
pivoted on that moment. I I I would
argue though that the pivot was was less
about the conversation about whether he
was staying on and and and that part of
the conversation, and really his answer
to the question that occurred right
before that. That was the question
about, "Hey, aren't you more worried
about the employment outlook?" And he
definitively said no
uh to that and and then pivoted to the
challenge on inflation. And and from my
reckoning in the meeting, that was the
point at which the the meeting turned
hawkish because the the majority of the
discussion around the meeting is around
inflation, whether it was the tariff
inflation not coming down as much as
expected, the unknown impact of energy
prices on future inflation. So, you have
this kind of backdrop of forces that are
pushing up inflation and disappointing
the expectations for inflation to
decline in in the backdrop of stable
unemployment rates. And so, that really
I think pivoted the market reaction to a
uh-oh, this Fed is much more hawkish.
The front end flattening, the equity
markets responding, and that was the
moment in the meeting where this this
moved from what had started out as a
kind of dovish statement interpretation
holding the Waller dissent to the side
for a second into a definitively hawkish
press conference. Jeff, I'm looking
right now, and we've completely priced
out a rate cut for 2026. The first rate
cut now isn't priced in until July of
2027. Does that matter for risk assets?
Does that matter in any way, shape, or
form or is the Fed been totally
sidelined by other events?
Well, I think it does matter because
that's what you're seeing in the
markets, right? Risk assets are going
down and and I think they're going down
because of a pricing in of a more
hawkish Fed. This is a risk asset market
that has benefited for a very long time
from a highly accommodative Fed both in
terms of of price and quantity when you
think about the impact of the balance
sheet. So, as we debate what the future
Fed looks like, there's both a price and
quantity uncertainty there, but both of
those in the past have been highly
supportive. When you challenge that,
that immediately reprices, you know, the
Fed's near-term expectations, which
you're talking about, but also the
degree to which that liquidity in price
and quantity has supported and will have
the outlook continuing to support risky
assets.
>> Jeff Jeff and I were going back and
forth during the press conference about
what the flight to Monza is going to be
the first week of September. It's
already up 60%. It's moved 60% in the
Milan.
>> you want an F1 ride? Already as well. Up
as well. Where are we going to be to
both of you? Let me start with Jeff
Rosenberg here. Demand destruction to me
is tangible when you see a given fancy
plane ticket go up 60% or a gallon of
gas. What does BlackRock say about
demand destruction?
Well, it's interesting because the the
last question in the press conference,
the premise was, if you remember it, how
high does do energy prices have to go
before you'll consider hiking rates? And
and that just misses this whole point
about demand destruction because the
scenario where this goes on longer and
is more disruptive to oil prices is a
scenario where you shift the focus from
inflation, which is today's and and
really the last couple of weeks story,
to a growth story. And it's not how high
do oil prices go before you hike, but
how I how high and for how long do oil
prices get before you cut. And and I
think that's the the the the swing
there. The chance that that's exactly
where I am is that this is a GDP story
of constructing GDP under massive price
stress. Absolutely because now we'll
begin to watch on the weekly data, on
the monthly data. We have data for how
many miles are driven in the US. We have
data for how much money is spent on gas
at the pump. We also have data for air
fares and how much [clears throat]
people are spending on buying airline
tickets. So for that reason if those
things begin to come out, especially
even the anecdotal evidence of this
slowing down, this should begin to be
more worrying.
>> John close the loop with you. Utility
prices in the United Kingdom. It's the
same thing. We're not I mean I think
Jerome Powell is aware of this frankly,
but the zeitgeist is not talking about
the GDP demand
>> to get me in so much trouble with
regards to the UK. They've got a problem
over there and his name's Ed Miliband.
I'm going to leave it there. And you can
sort that out yourselves cuz I don't
live there anymore.
I'm going to talk about the shock with
COVID and the inverse, the mirror image
of what we see now, which is something
Jeff Currie of Carlyle was talking about
earlier on this morning on Bloomberg TV.
In COVID we had a massive demand shock
and it took negative prices to rebalance
the market. The whole most crisis is the
complete inverse of that. So you've got
a massive supply shock that requires
much, much higher prices to rebalance
the market. So to your point, the
question is whether $100 in the paper
market in futures right now and the
futures curve going out to December, the
price is something in the high 70s is
sufficient enough to do that at the
moment. Well, that's why what's
interesting about also what Tom is
saying, if you look at the ECB, they
revised inflation up. Let's just agree
that makes total sense. But they also
revised GDP up telling you that they are
not assuming any demand destruction
whatsoever.
So well, the textbook would certainly
tell you that an oil price shock is
stagflation. You get higher prices and
lower GDP and there was no evidence of
that in the ECB today. Jeff, that's a
big question. I I it's an important one.
Where's the hit to growth from the
higher inflation, from the higher
outlook for energy prices?
Well, it's certainly not in their
forecast, and that's that's the clear
kind of takeaway is that the forecasts
are basically talking about a temporary,
transitory, to use that word, impact.
So, that's not in the forecast. I I
don't think we want to take too much
away from that because if you look at
page 16 of the SEP,
uh it it it talks about the uncertainty
in the forecast. The uncertainty in
these forecasts is greater than the
mean. And so, that really tells you
there's not a huge amount of forecast
accuracy here. So, let's kind of put
aside that these are actual forecasts of
where we're going to go for what is
really important here is it kind of
tells us about the tone and the
consideration of of of the committee.
And that is basically and and Powell
talked about this a little bit of
upgrading. The longer-term upgrade to
growth, I think, is the message. The
little bit of the longer-term upgrade to
the uh Fed funds uh uh
uh terminal rate uh going up. And it's a
little bit of a productivity story. But
that is ignoring any kind of short-term
impact becoming bigger [clears throat]
issue for 2026 in the economic outlook
from the oil price shock.
>> Hi, Jeff. It's good to see you. It's
great to catch up. Jeff Rosenberg there
at BlackRock breaking down some of these
moves with Brent crude TK getting closer
and closer again to 110. Well, just
under 106 and we're popping up 109.38 a
set of headlines coming off of our uh
Dubai desk through T-Live. And I'm
sorry, there's misselection. It's 10:43
at night. It starts for another evening
in the Persian Gulf.
>> Would you like the F1 rant now since you
brought up Formula 1 and and Monza and
such?
>> You and I are going back and forth.
I mean, I mean, you know, we've both
been medicated, but I'm sorry. It's just
it's not good.
>> Billion-dollar Mario Kart.
Seriously. I I I give I'm watching a
computer game.
>> the Apple coverage, and it's tragic they
have to deal with the shat Truly, as
Verstappen would say, the shattering of
the sport.
>> It's not racing if the racing driver is
going through the corner slowing down to
harvest battery power. Can they fix it
now or is this going to take a committee
meeting one year out? I hope they can. I
have doubts they won't. There's going to
be a lot of pressure on them if the fans
start to depart. For me this is for the
tourists, not for the purists. And if
Max Verstappen steps away from a sport
he loves, imagine any other sport where
the biggest star in that sport is
thinking about a sabbatical. And right
now it sounds like he's thinking about a
sabbatical. I I I
again it's exciting like canceled the
two races in the Saudi in Bahrain,
excuse me, in Saudi because of this
crisis. And you know, life will go on,
but you know, it's again the unexpected
just like we faced here today. Going to
park the F1 now. We're going to yeah.
I promise I'm going to stop by Monza in
September. I'm enjoying this. I honestly
was going down a rabbit hole that no one
needs to go down. I can't afford to to
fly to to Milan now. Come on, you and
the fam can over to Monza September 6th.
I'd love to. Brahma can do the
unemployment report. I'm not going to
make that happen. I see here like the
world is falling. Tosin, it's good to
see you. Tosin Slock there of Apollo. I
thought that would be a boring news
conference. It was not a boring news
conference and this is a story that's
going to run for a while now. Succession
planning at the most important central
bank on the planet, arguably the most
important financial institution on the
planet has totally broken down. That's
the problem. That's a problem, but also
this is a Fed that's not going to come
in and rescue equity markets [music]
with this concern of exactly how this is
going to settle out and why equity
markets are taking notice. Because they
can't. Crude right now, Brent close to
110. Coming up tomorrow on Bloomberg TV,
we'll catch up with Krishna Guha of
Evercore and a whole lot more. From New
York City this afternoon, good
afternoon. [music] This was Bloomberg
Surveillance.